Actors for Innovation in Green IT
Christina Herzog, Laurent Lefèvre and Jean-Marc Pierson

Abstract Green IT is a mandatory process required for energy consumption
reduction and sustainable development. Many actors are involved in the development and adoption of Green IT, ranging from individual persons to research groups,
companies, governments, and countries. This chapter identifies actors for innovation in the field of Green IT, explores, and defines them. Their interactions are
detailed and their influence on the Green IT landscape is pointed out. A definition of
Green IT is given as a common understanding to form a basis for all further
investigations of this sector. Then we detail the different actors of innovation in
Green IT and outline their relationships to understand the keys for better development and adoption of Green IT.
Keywords Green IT

 Standardization  Innovation

1 Introduction
Greening IT is a process required for reducing the consumption of energy and
scarce materials used in IT. Green IT is a factor of innovation which can be
considered as a large potential impacting contributor in terms of employment and
societal improvements.

C. Herzog  J.-M. Pierson (&)
IRIT, University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France
e-mail: Pierson@irit.fr
C. Herzog
e-mail: Herzog@irit.fr
L. Lefèvre
INRIA, Laboratoire LIP, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Université de Lyon,
Lyon, France
e-mail: Laurent.Lefevre@inria.fr
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
L.M. Hilty and B. Aebischer (eds.), ICT Innovations for Sustainability,
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 310,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09228-7_3

49

50

C. Herzog et al.

This domain is being explored by a large number of academic and industrial
research groups through the world. To be more impactive, it requires formalized
links and support from various bodies (funding agencies, standardization bodies,
technology transfer offices (TTO), etc.). It is crucial to understand the interactions
between these entities in order to improve Green IT adoption and advancements.
This chapter proposes to define the set of actors involved in innovation in Green
IT: standardization bodies, influential groups, funding agencies, universities and
academic research institutes, companies, technology transfer offices, and business
angels.
We will explore involved actors using a standardized canvas which consists of
defining the actors, giving some illustrative examples, analyzing the leverages for
Green IT development and focusing on their potential for boosting it or slowing it
down. This canvas will be also used for analyzing the links between selected actors
in given scenarios.
While describing actors and their links in a formal model is fundamental, we
have also investigated the implementation of such a model in a multi-agent system.
We will briefly introduce this aspect so as to explain how the consideration of this
chapter can be eventually concretized in a simulator.
The organization of this chapter is as follows: It will quickly revisit the definition of Green IT in Sect. 2. The formalized actors developing innovation in
Green IT will be considered in Sect. 3, and in Sect. 4 actors supporting Green IT
advances will be described. Section 5 will carefully select and analyze some
scenarios in order to illustrate links and interactions between subsets of actors.
Section 6 will present models for innovation and briefly describe our methodology
for implementing a simulator of the complex system, and Sect. 7 will conclude
this chapter.

2 Green IT
A large number of definitions of Green IT exist in the scientific and public press, in
the scientific community, and in general discussions. These definitions take several
aspects into account, such as optimizing cooling, optimizing server placement in
data centers, shutting down unused devices from screens to complete servers, etc.
They are more or less general. Some definitions also deal with economic aspects,
while others focus mainly on energy management.
In our work, we use the life-cycle view given by Hilty [1]. Green IT must be
involved in every phase, not only the use phase, but also production and end of
life. Green IT helps to decrease the ecological damages which we all have to pay.
Unfortunately the real costs for production and the ‘‘costs’’ for our environment
are often not taken into account while we still will have to pay for them: hardware
producing and recycling, with the societal aspects of people living in these areas
where raw materials came from or are dismantled. Murugesan defines the field of
green computing in [2] as ‘‘the study and practice of designing, manufacturing,

Actors for Innovation in Green IT

51

using, and disposing of computers, servers, and associated subsystems—such as
monitors, printers, storage devices, and networking and communication systems—
efficiently and effectively with minimal or no impact on the environment’’. Many
such slightly different definitions of Green IT exist due to the youth of this research
field. Energy consumption awareness, the impacts of hardware production on the
environment, recycling of IT equipment, etc. have become important public topics
only during recent years. Previously, these issues were less discussed in IT and not
at all in IT research.
Based on various definitions and motivations for Green IT, a basis for this work
is stated: ‘‘Green IT is the effort to reduce resource consumption and environmental impact in IT. The reason for using Green IT may arise from economic,
social, or ecological interests. Actions can affect the whole life cycle of IT—from
construction via utilization through to disposal’’.
In the following, the actors for innovation in Green IT are considered, following
the above definition. In some cases, actors may push more in the ecological
dimension, some others in the economical dimension, and yet others in societal
dimensions. It is idealistic (and not reasonable) to state that one actor drives in just
one direction, hence every actor will have a mix of interests in Green IT, viewed
from these three dimensions. These different interests may boost innovation
differently.

3 Actors Developing Innovation in Green IT
As in any other technical or scientific field, many actors are involved in the
development and adoption of Green IT. These actors are diverse by nature, by
interest and motivation, and by means of changing the field. They span from
individual persons (e.g., an activist, a researcher, a consultant), research groups in
academia (research institutes, universities, academic research networks), companies (developing technologies, advising companies), groups of companies (influential and lobbying groups), governments (through public incentives, laws), to
groups of governments (e.g., European Union).
All the actors interact in a kind of microcosm building and feeding each other,
influencing and moving forward toward Green IT, at least toward their own view
of Green IT. Before discussing their links in Sect. 4, we will oversee here some
actors of innovation. The following actors may boost or slow down the development of innovation in Green IT, depending on different factors.
Formally, in this section we will detail some of the actors involved in the
development of innovation in Green IT. The methodology we pursue is the following: We first define the actor, give some examples, and name the action
leverages this actor can have in developing Green IT. We try to outline the boost
this actor is giving to the field, or, conversely, the slowdown the actor may
provoke.

52

C. Herzog et al.

In [3] we studied the similarities and differences between academia and
industry related to 13 dimensions grouped in 3 categories: the process of research
and innovation; the criteria of success and dissemination aspects; the organization.
This section can therefore be seen as an extension of this preliminary work as well
as its modeling.
We will explore involved actors through a standardized framework which
consists in defining the actor (a), giving some examples (b), analyzing the leverages for Green IT development (c) and focusing on the potential boosting or
slowing down features (d).

3.1 Standardization Bodies
(a) Definition. This section does not aim at giving a full global view of the Green
IT standardization initiatives, but rather tries to outline the role and links between
and among the standardization bodies [4, 5]. It is based on a study on the standardization bodies in the field of data center energy efficiency [6], complemented
with newer developments in standardization efforts.
Standardization bodies can be categorized in two categories: (i) international
formal standardization bodies (and their regional and national counterparts); (ii)
influential groups and professional bodies. The section will describe category (i) in
more detail. Category (ii) is described in the following section (Sect. 3.2).
In Fig. 1, one can see that the first providers of materials and tools that may
make their way to actual standards are industry alliances, academic researchers, or
both in collaborative projects. Some of the proposed ideas may be presented in one
or several standardization bodies to eventually become standards. These standards
can in turn be used by governments (at the national, federal, or European levels) as
regulations in laws that must (and can) be enforced. Governments can use the
materials directly as regulations, recommendations, or labels. While the process
for formal standardization takes a long time since a consensus has to be achieved
between all members (especially states), the direct link with governments is
sometimes more efficient. Finally, it must be noted that some metrics, tools, and
methods provided by industry and academia are used directly by final users and
may become de facto standards. At the center of the figure is the certification
authority whose role is to certify that the measurements claimed by suppliers of
technologies actually follow the standards, the labels, or the recommendations.
(b) Examples of Standardization Bodies. The ISO (International Standardization
Organization), the IEC (International Electrotechnical Commission), the IEEE-SA
(Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Standards Association) and the
UN ITU (United Nations International Telecommunications Union) are three
important bodies in the Green IT landscape.

Actors for Innovation in Green IT

53

Fig. 1 Standardization stakeholders

(c) Leverages for Green IT Development. All three standardization bodies have
activities in Green IT in general and in data center energy efficiency in particular.
Their action lies in the development of standards, some individually, others in joint
groups. The standards range from the design, the production, and the operation, to
the recycling of IT services and materials. Some standards may be used directly by
stakeholders or by states for regulation.
For instance, ISO 14064-1 is used for reporting on greenhouse gases and makes
use of the GHG Protocol, while ISO 14101 addresses the environmental impact of
an organization in general. Within IEC, Task Committee 111 is interested in
environmental standardization for electrical and electronic products and systems.
UN ITU-T Study Group 5 evaluates the effects of ICT on climate change and
publishes guidelines for using ICT in an eco-friendly way. It is also responsible for
studying design methodologies to reduce environmental effects. ITU-T L.1200
specifies the Direct Current interfaces while ITU-T L.1300 describes best practices
to reduce negative impact of datacenters on climate.
Joint Technical Committees (JTC) are established between ISO and IEC in
specific areas. JTC 1/SC 39 is the joint sub-committee on ‘‘Sustainability for and
by Information Technology.’’ The framework for describing metrics for energy
efficiency is in flux and must be considered when developing new metrics for their
standardization: standards 30134-1 (General Requirements and Definitions) and
30134-2 (Power-Usage Effectiveness, PUE).
At the regional level, concerning European standardization activities on data
centers, ETSI (European Telecommunication Standard Institute) is responsible for
the network, CENELEC (European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation) for the power infrastructure, CEN for IT management, ASHRAE for cooling
(not EU-specific), and CEN/CENELEC for monitoring. The need for having joint

54

C. Herzog et al.

and coordinated groups is obvious with so many different actors involved. The
establishment of the Coordination Group on Green Data Centers (CEN-CENELEC-ETSI) helps to harmonize initiatives.
(d) Boosting or slowing down. Without a doubt, the role of standardization is
globally, and in the long term, boosting the adoption of a technology and its
dissemination throughout society. However, in the context of Green IT and IT in
general, the duration of the standardization process is often not compatible with
the pace of innovation. One such example is the TCP/IP protocol stack never
standardized but de facto a standard. In Green IT, the same applies to PUE, which
is still under development in standardization bodies, while already widely adopted
(and sometimes misused) by industry.

3.2 Influential Groups
(a) Definition. Complementary to standardization bodies, some influential groups
propose to enforce and influence development of Green IT by addressing the issue
at various levels. Some are country-based, others interact at the global level. Some
are purely industrial or academic, others are a mix of both. Some of these groups
can be activated by governments, and some can also propose and defend some
standards.
(b) Examples. The Green Grid is a non-profit organization, an open industry
consortium of IT suppliers, end users, policy-makers, technology providers, and
utility companies. Its aim is to unite global industry efforts, to create sets of
metrics, and to develop educational tools. There is a strong link with the American
Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE), The
Chartered Institute for IT (BCS), and the China Communications Standards
Association (CCSA).
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Standards Association
(IEEE-SA) is an organization within the IEEE developing global standards in a
broad range of industries. IEEE-SA promotes its own standards for electronic
products. In Green IT, it addresses desktop personal computers, laptops, and
personal monitors. The standard covers environmental aspects of a product along
the entire life cycle.
The GreenTouch initiative is devoted to exploring energy efficiency in networks. The main goal of this large academic and industrial consortium is to
support an increase in network energy efficiency by a factor of 1,000 by 2015. This
group explores all levels of technology and innovation associated with networks:
wired and optical, wireless, routing and switching, services, etc.
(c) Leverages for Green IT Development. The influential groups can have a major
impact on promoting and developing Green IT. By supporting collaborations and

Actors for Innovation in Green IT

55

direct links between diversified partners, they enforce the promotion and dissemination of innovation.
(d) Boosting or slowing down. Like standardization bodies, influential groups have
a large potential to boost Green IT development. But contrary to these bodies, with
some disruptive supported approaches (like in GreenTouch), they bypass limitations due to long processes.

3.3 Universities/Academic Institutes
(a) Definition. Universities and academic institutes include the groups involved in
the development of Green IT through academic research. These groups can be
financially supported through a mix of international, European, national, regional,
or private funding. Innovation in Green IT can come from permanent or temporary
contributors: professors and assistant professors, researchers, postdocs, PhD,
graduate, and undergraduate students, engineers.
(b) Examples. These actors include purely university research groups and groups at
research institutes.
(c) Leverages for Green IT development. Academic researchers can have an
excellent research overview due to their ongoing exchange with other academic
research institutions. This overview allows them to connect various research ideas
and to be up-to-date with new developments in research. Due to participation in
conferences, collaboration in journals, and other activities together with researchers
from other universities, a worldwide network of researchers exists. This community
interacts on special issues of well-defined research. This specification leads to a
very high level of scientific exchange producing new ideas with the possibility to
prove easily whether it makes sense to continue in a particular direction, whether
this direction can be considered useful or not, or if this idea has already been
investigated—and if so, what are the existing but not yet published results.
(d) Boosting or slowing down. With some ‘‘freedom’’ in exploring new and disruptive fields, this actor can be a major contributor in boosting innovation in Green
IT. But researchers may lack links to industry as they are not required to seek out
cooperation with industry. This missing link may lead to the fact that the research
work and results do not meet the demands of industry.

3.4 Companies
(a) Definition. A company can be defined as an ‘‘artificial person,’’ invisible,
intangible, created by or under law, with a discrete legal entity, perpetual

56

C. Herzog et al.

succession, and a company seal. It is an association of individuals (natural or legal
persons or a combination of both). Company members share a common purpose,
organizing their resources and skills to achieve a well-defined goal.
(b) Examples. In this set of actors, we find many different companies, from SMEs
to large groups. Their potential influence is related to their size and importance in
the field. Besides the large historic companies such as IBM, some newcomers
concentrate especially on the field of Green IT (to differentiate their business
value) and may become the next generation giant (or be bought by it).
(c) Leverages for Green IT development. A customer-company relationship always
exists, meaning that the company is close to changes in society, the first one to get
to know new trends, hypes, and interests. Companies may react quickly to these
changes as a new hype also means a new market for them, hence new business/
profit to be made. A company may also create new hypes in proposing new
technologies. This relationship holds the impact for developing innovations in
Green IT. With society discussing ‘‘being green and greener,’’ companies propose
greener products with additional features, creating a new hype, which forces
competitors to follow this direction and moreover inspires research institutions and
funding agencies to take new directions.
(d) Boosting or slowing down. On the one hand, companies may boost innovation
for Green IT, but on the other hand they also have the possibility to slow Green IT
and innovation in general. As a rule, companies are interested in making money,
doing business, and staying on the market. If an innovation could decrease their
turnover or favor another brand, a company may protect an innovation with the
aim of not bringing it to market.
In [3] the different approaches are presented and some are investigated more
deeply to show the differences between academia and industry.

4 Actors Supporting Innovation for Green IT
4.1 Funding Agencies
(a) Definition. Funding Agencies are organizations providing the mechanisms in
which financial incentives are provided to academia or industry individually, or
both together. Innovations in Green IT are influenced by funding organizations, as
they drive academia in certain directions of research when deciding the topics of
open calls.
(b) Examples. The European Framework Program 7 and the new Horizon 2020, the
French National Agency for Research, and the German FWF (Fonds zur Förderung
der wissenschaftlichen Forschung) fall in this category. Countries may have
dedicated agencies for Green aspects such the US EPA.

Actors for Innovation in Green IT

57

(c) Leverages for Green IT development. Before funding agencies publish an open
call, experts are invited to give their ideas about new interesting research. Even at
this stage, these experts are deciding the direction of research for the upcoming
years, as these calls are in general fixed for at least one year. By using money as an
incentive, the impact of such open calls on Green IT development is both direct
(for the actors benefiting from the grants) and indirect (since these actors will have
a societal and economic impact on their own).
(d) Boosting or slowing down. A difficulty arises from this situation in that new
research ideas, social movements, and upcoming trends cannot be taken into
account immediately. Additionally, the high administrative workload creates difficulties for organizations applying for funding. Identifying partners with whom to
form a consortium according to the rules of the funding organization takes time,
and consortia are not always formed by the requirements of the work packages, but
more because partners are needed to respect the rules of the funding organization.
Energy and money are wasted because rules for open calls are too strict, and
organizations waste time due to burdensome administrative requirements instead
of using this time for new research. The advantage of these funding organizations
is that they group research ideas and that their research funds are rather large.
Funding agencies provide grants for fundamental research, while other actors
involved in the innovation process are interested in applied research.
The role of funding organizations will have to change to become a real booster
for innovative research. This does not mean that the traditional role has to disappear, but rather that additional roles have to be created.

4.2 Technology Transfer Offices
(a) Definition. Technology transfer describes the formal process of transferring
rights from scientific research to another party. The aim is to use and commercialize innovative research and results. These rights might be intellectual property
(IP) in form of patents, copyrights, or any other form of IP, depending on the
product or result of the research. This process involves invention disclosure,
licensing, funded research, and also start-up ventures. Research may be sponsored
in the form of milestone payments, and it may generate licensing royalties. Most
academic and research institutions have now formalized their technology transfer
policies. These policies do not always fit with the needs of industry, and TTOs
have to find the best way to combine the two sets of interests. TTOs are the
interface between industry and research institution. Figure 2 is describing the
functioning of TTOs.
(b) Examples. In France, the government created a special company status names
as SATT, for Technology Transfer. Some universities created their own TTO
within this framework, like for instance TTT (Toulouse Technology Transfer).

58

C. Herzog et al.

Fig. 2 Technology Transfer Offices’ roles in innovation transfer

(c) Leverages for Green IT development. Technology transfer may be divided into
4 phases:
• The TTO has a relationship with the research institution. This relationship
might be with one specific researcher, with the entire research staff, or with the
whole institution. The TTO monitors ongoing research and provides links to
commercial partners to fund ongoing research.
• Once the researcher files an invention disclosure with the institution, the TTO
evaluates the commercial perspectives and possibilities. If the invention has
potential, the TTO will pursue the patent application.
• Once the patent application is filed, the TTO will actively pursue commercial
partners for license agreements or other forms of alliances.
• Fees and royalties emerging from commercialization will be paid. The TTO has
the aim to become financially self-sufficient, but the research institution has
different aims, such as societal benefit or enhancing its own reputation.
(d) Boosting or slowing down. TTOs boost new research, as they observe ongoing
research as well as industry and the market and can quickly give feedback whether
the research may be accepted on the market and meets the needs of industry. But
TTOs are interested in financial independence, and it might be the case that they
only see the financial return and not the innovation for society. Generally speaking,
TTOs are rather new in some countries, and it remains to be seen whether they will
become important actors.

Actors for Innovation in Green IT

59

4.3 Business Angels
(a) Definition. A business angel is an individual providing capital, but also
knowledge and contact data, for a business start-up in a very early stage of its
creation. Business angels are generally successful managers with more experience
than the founder of a company.
(b) Examples. The World Business Angel Association is an international organization with the aim of promoting the idea of business angels and stimulating the
exchange of knowledge and best practices in angel investing. This not-for-profit
organization is based in Brussels and operates worldwide.
(c) Leverages for Green IT development. An obvious leverage of business angels is
the money they invest in the Green IT start-up. Besides investing money, business
angels also provide their knowledge of the field and their contacts. The start-up
will have to pay back the sum invested. This may happen by exchanging convertible debts or ownership equity.
(d) Boosting or slowing down. Business Angels have a global overview of the
industry in their field. If a start-up needs support in its early stages, business angels
may help. They may provide contacts as well as financial support. Especially in
Green IT, as a rather young research field, business angels are useful as they are
experienced managers who know the markets, and potential partners find them
trustworthy.
However, like all other actors, business angels have to be convinced of the idea
in Green IT. If the business idea with the innovation were to fail, their reputation
(or at least their credibility in the view of banks) would be damaged.

4.4 Governments
(a) Definition. At the national or international level, governments can certify,
regulate, or enforce the usage of technologies, based on several factors. These
factors can be related to Green IT and sustainability.
(b) Examples. The Energy Star program is a widely adopted means aimed at
offering customers the possibility to buy more efficient products than required by
law. In the US, the Department of Energy regularly monitors the compliance of the
products with the Energy Star label, which was developed by the Environment
Protection Agency (www.energystar.gov). The European Union Code of Conduct
(EU CoC) is another such initiative. Its aim is to inform and foster the improvement of energy efficiency in the planning and operation of data centers. It is also a
voluntary initiative to help design and operate data centers and to report on their
power consumption.

60

C. Herzog et al.

(c) Leverages for Green IT development. So far, the above initiatives are not laws
and thus cannot be enforced, and their impacts could be considered negligible,
while they could help speed up the process of innovation transfer. However, the
choice of governments to promote some standards or technologies even without
introducing regulations has a direct impact on the visibility and attractiveness of
these standards and technologies.
(d) Boosting or slowing down. Indirectly, these initiatives have impacts on Green
IT development. Customers tend to choose the most efficient products; companies
building energy-efficient products promote these labels in their marketing; data
centers operating under the EU CoC advertise this fact, publicize their increase in
energy efficiency, and use it as a commercial advantage. The direct and indirect
social effect must therefore be included in this study.

5 Links and Interactions
As stated before, the different actors interact. These interactions can be of several
kinds: between actors of the same group (e.g., between researchers) or between
actors from different groups (e.g., researchers and companies). Formally, one
should describe all the links between all the actors in Sects. 3 and 4 in detail and
study them. We established eight actors, resulting in a potential for 28 links. We
argue here that, among all these links, some have greater impacts on the development of Green IT than others, or have the potential to have stronger impacts if
such links were to be established.
Following the method used in the previous sections, we detail in this section
some of the links by defining them (which actors are involved, what is the nature
or the object of the link, which metric could be used to assess the strength of this
link), giving some examples, ascertaining what the leverages of this link are for
developing innovation in Green IT, and what the impact of this link is for boosting
or slowing down the process.

5.1 Link Between Universities
(a) Definition. This link is the most common one for researchers. Research is
conducted in networks, and this link represents the actual joint research output. It
can be assessed by the number of joint publications in Green IT, the number of
regular visits, and the number of contracts in which two research groups collaborate. Also, PhD co-supervisions provide evidence of a stronger link.
(b) Example. The PhD candidate writing this chapter is co-supervised by and has
produced some papers with both research groups. COST (European Cooperation in
Science and Technology) Action IC0804 (www.cost804.org) and the new IC1305

Actors for Innovation in Green IT

61

are also examples of such networks in the field of energy efficiency in large-scale
distributed systems (such as the cloud, HPC, networks, …) and ultrascale computing (up to the exascale).
(c) Leverages of this link for Green IT. Each research group in universities has
some level of freedom to investigate particular topics, hence Green IT can be one
of the topics selected. Also, some funding agencies may choose to favor Green IT
if they already see some strong collaboration between partners and high-level
publication results in the field. For instance, the COST office decides which actions
to fund: The existence of the named funded networks has clearly furthered
research in Green IT. Not to be forgotten is the intrinsic scientific reputation of
each partner (leading to more or less strong commitment to collaborate).
(d) Boosting or slowing down factors in Green IT. While research groups have the
capability to collaborate easily, it certainly furthers Green IT research when it is
also their choice to do so. However, two factors may limit the impact of this link:
The first is obviously the lack of money to hire staff or students to pursue or
support the research, meaning that funding is not in line with ambition. The second
is that a link may lose importance in one of the research groups independently of
the partner, due to a new policy of the university or better opportunity or growing
links in other fields: One cannot do everything and interests may change due to the
above mentioned freedom.

5.2 Link Between University and Company
(a) Definition. This link is probably the oldest besides the one between universities.
It is also one of the most controversial. The role of universities has changed during
the last decade. Universities are becoming almost an industrial partner in collaborations, even if differences still exist, as explained in [3]. The link represents the
contractual interaction between university and company and the value added to
both partners through this (close) cooperation.
(b) Example. Numerous examples exist, but as these contracts are confidential, it is
impossible to mention examples. Possible partners of universities in the field of
(Green) IT are IBM, Microsoft, but also energy providers as well as major energy
consumers or small SME interested in catching up with a new emerging market.
(c) Leverages of this link for Green IT. This link is important for each development
in the field of Green IT. Companies are interested in new technologies in order to be
the first one to enter the market and earn money. Cooperating with universities may
be cheaper than having an research department of their own. However, many large
groups already have research departments, some strongly linked with universities or
employing former university staff (PhD students, for instance). For universities, it is

62

C. Herzog et al.

an advantage to have links with industry: Industry may finance research by paying
for students or by paying for results. Overall, it may be a win-win situation.
(d) Boosting or slowing down. This link depends is probably most strongly
dependent on the contract(s) signed by partners, since they have different interests,
as explained in [3]. These differences slow down the impact on Green IT, as it may
take a long time to define common interests and goals. Also, links may weaken
after the end of the contract, especially when university staff is frequently replaced
due to limited contracts. Then, knowledge has to be built again almost from
scratch, since only few permanent positions, which could provide for continuity,
are available. This may change in the future, as the impact of the newly created
TTOs will become apparent in some years. A company may also keep new
technologies confidential if they represent a danger for the business. This case does
not involve slowing down the innovation, but stopping it. In many cases, the
interaction between industry and academia promotes innovation in Green IT.

5.3 Link Between Standardization Bodies and Influential
Groups
(a) Definition. This link details the relationship existing between standardization
bodies and influential groups. The metric for assessing this link can be the ratio of
representatives from the various influential groups in each standardization body, in
terms of absolute numbers and percentages. This will help to estimate their
respective weights in the decision process.
(b) Example. One such example is the ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committees.
Despite being open to members of the participating countries, there are only a few
academic researchers in the formed working groups, for reasons outlined earlier:
Motivations for researchers are linked to their scientific reputations and careers,
and involvement in such bodies is not key for these. More specifically, the JTC1/
39 group mentioned earlier is strongly linked with the GreenGrid in particular for
defining the Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE), which was first described by the
Green Grid in 2007. The definition of PUE was updated in 2012 [7] and is now
being considered for standardization. There is only one academic out of 29 editors
of and contributors to the Green Grid reference document, but 20 companies are
represented. Only large IT-related groups are present in the list.
(c) Leverages of this link toward Green IT. As explained in 3.1 and 4.4, the impact
of standardization and governments can be high. The stronger the link between
influential groups and standardization bodies, the faster the development can be.
Indeed, standardization activities suffer from a long process duration that cannot
be followed by individuals, and only structured groups can actually influence
decisions.

Actors for Innovation in Green IT

63

(d) Boosting or slowing down. Mostly driven by company-paid officers, standardization initiatives therefore reflect the interests of companies as well as
member states trying to effectively promote their industries. One example involves
the metrics for assessing the efficiency of data centers. Each country may participate in the final document for standardization (and eventually vote on it). However, it should be noted that the groups following this work are small in each
country, and basically represent the same interests (sometimes they are even the
same people). Other examples also discussed in the JTS1/39 group are WUE
(Water Usage Effectiveness), CUE (Carbon Usage Effectiveness), and the more
controversial GEC (Green Energy Coefficient). This latter promotes the use of
green energy (which also has to be defined). Every country, protecting its industry,
may behave differently with regard to these metrics. For instance, France’s
overwhelming electrical power source is nuclear. Data centers located in France
benefit from a very good CUE value, but may have a bad GEC value compared to
Canada, for instance, where power comes from mainly from hydroelectric plants.
The choice of which standard may emerge for regulations (for instance, in EU
directives and laws) is therefore a strategic issue for governments and industries.

5.4 Links Between TTOs and Universities
(a) Definition. This link is one of the most crucial if universities, researchers, or
research groups want to commercialize innovations, results, and research. TTOs
(should) monitor ongoing research carefully in order to identify important outcomes immediately. Important outcomes must be considered as to their industrial
importance. This link represents the value of a university for industry.
(b) Example. Many universities now have a TTO, perhaps under a different name,
as e.g., the project service office (PSB) at the University of Innsbruck. In France,
the government created SATT, which has the same function as TTOs. As universities are mainly independent now, each may have a different contract with the
relevant TTO.
(c) Leverages of this link toward Green IT. As TTOs are the interface between
universities and industry, their influence on Green IT and new directions of
research is rather high. TTOs are aware of new hypes in the industry and may
therefore influence academic research due their relationship with the university.
TTOs may give advice concerning the direction of the research, so it is their duty
to discover new hypes on the markets and to encourage universities to strengthen
research for industry.
(d) Boosting or slowing down. TTOs and their interaction with universities may
boost as well as slow down innovation. The daily business of TTOs is to deal with
contracts, Intellectual Properties, and research. Therefore, TTOs and their

64

C. Herzog et al.

relationships with universities clearly boost innovations as administration takes
less time and people working for the TTOs are up-to-date with research. In the best
case, they were researchers before working for TTOs. A close relationship
between TTOs and universities is clearly an advantage for collaborating with
industry. On the other hand, a TTO is a third party joining, and what was previously a contract between two parties (industry and academia) is now a virtual
contract between the TTO, industry, and the university. Even if TTOs represent
the university they also have an interest in becoming financially independent.
Their interest is to earn money by selling results, and this may slow down
the smooth flow of interactions between industry and academia.

6 Models for Innovation
In this section, we outline first steps for modeling technology transfer between
researchers and industry and its impact for society. Multi-agent systems (MAS) are
well-suited for modeling the interactions in distributed environments, and aiming
at optimizing a cost function, either for each individual, or for the community, or
both. They have been successfully used in a variety of scenarios, including in
Green IT where agents can be pieces of software moving between the physical
hosts to find ‘‘greener’’ places, or conversely agents are the hosts trying to minimize their own ecological footprints.
The usage of MAS is not limited to computer science, and social science [8]
uses MAS, for instance to model loose and hidden interactions, where nonexpected behavior can emerge from a crowd. In this vein, the authors in [9]
propose a survey of the usage of multi-agent systems for innovation diffusion.
They show that the diffusion of innovations is a contagious process, driven by
external influence such as mass media as well as by internal influence (word of
mouth). The direct and indirect influences of the actors are derived in terms of
mathematics and probability for anyone to adopt a technology. Then aggregate
models are derived for communities of potential adopters. Showing the limits of
aggregate models, they advocate for individual-level models of innovation diffusion. Agent-based models are shown to outperform aggregate models in a number
of dimensions. Each agent is an autonomous decision-making entity interacting
with others and its environment through a set of rules. Micro-level interactions
between entities (the interactions described in Sect. 4) lead to macro-scale
dynamics in an autonomic emergent manner. Thanks to this modeling, the global
status of Green IT can be studied and compared for different scenarios of cooperation, funding, and influences between the partners.
We argue that it is feasible to model the innovation patterns in Green IT. In [4]
we proposed a first step toward such a model. This study included four kinds of
agents: Green IT researcher, IT researcher, general researcher, and society.
Building on the methodology described in Sects. 3, 4, and 5, we can develop the
agent-based model further.

Actors for Innovation in Green IT

65

In this section, we will detail some scenarios using some of the actors and links
defined above.
Scenario 1 (Direct collaboration). A company contacts a university research group
in order to start collaboration. This collaboration will be effective when the contract between the parties is signed, and the TTO acts as an intermediate for
determining intellectual property rights, contract details, and the like. The agreement states the amount of money allocated by the company, this is the input of the
model. The output of the model can be either a product, a patent, or some publications, depending on the agreement.
Scenario 2 (Funded project). This scenario includes four actors. A funding agency
publishes a call for proposals in the Green IT area. A consortium is formed
between one company and two universities. The chances of being funded are
determined based on the quality of the consortium and the research project proposed. If the project is funded, its output will include both industry-related results
and academic-related outputs, the effective output depending on the quality of the
groups, the size of the company, the researchers’ publication history, and other
factors.
Scenario 3 (Standardization activity). This scenario involves four actors. A
research group develops one metric for assessing the energy efficiency of data
centers and tries to interact with the appropriate standardization body: This
interaction depends on the body and number of academics participating. Then the
metric is assessed in the standardization body where influential groups or companies may promote or conversely limit its diffusion, based on their own interests
and strategies. Therefore, the interests of companies participating in influential
groups and/or standardization bodies are needed for this scenario. The output of
this scenario can be nil, or it can lead toward an effective standard in some
timeframe, promoted eventually for regulation by a government. The duration of
each interaction must therefore also be accounted for.
In these scenarios, different parameters are used as input or decisions patterns by
the stakeholders. Building a statistical background from previous observed real-life
interactions will help to determine the probabilities of the actors’ behavior in general. For instance, in Scenario 1, the amount of money can be computed as the mean
of previously observed contracts, and the output can be probabilistically determined
as a percentage for each possible output (patent, product, publications, …). It is
obvious that, when the model is set, we can observe the impact of increasing the
amount of money in a collaboration (scenario 1), changing the grants allocated or the
reputation of the partners (scenario 2), or the number of academics involved (scenario 3). The indirect output of one scenario must also be accounted for: For instance
when a research group produces a new publication, it increases its societal impact
(even though each individual publication may not have a high impact, the sum total
of publications may well in the long term), its reputation, its future potential success
in contracts, and so on.

66

C. Herzog et al.

Obtaining realistic input for the data at hand is one main difficulty of the
modeling effort. Properly building the model requires deep knowledge and precise
data analysis from various possible sources. We designed and circulated a survey
for the research and industry communities in order to gather input for the models.
We are currently investigating some easy-to-understand metrics in order to
assess the impacts of changes with regard to objective functions. These objective
functions include a global Green IT innovation impact of each scenario (that can
be computed from their outputs, with different weights associated to each output
value) that could support decision-making: For instance, one could calculate the
global impact of increasing participation in project calls, or the impact of raising
funds in funding agencies for Green IT, and so on.
We started to implement the proposed model using the NetLogo framework
(version 5) [10], which is widely used in the Agent-Based Modeling community.
Even preliminary experiments with few actors showed us the strength and
expressiveness of the associated language to properly describe the actors (agents,
links) of the system, and the associated tools to calculate some key metrics and
objectives to assess.

7 Conclusion and Future Work
In this chapter we analyzed the actors of innovation in Green IT, from the developments in research and technology to influential groups and standardization
efforts. While many actors interact with each other, the interplay between them is an
important aspect to be taken into consideration when trying to promote Green IT.
The future of our work will be to complete the modeling of these actors in terms of
agents in a multi-agent system, each actor being an agent pursuing its own interests
and motivation, connected to others by a number of valuable links, and to determine
quantitatively the main drivers or influential factors for a greener IT society.

References
1. Hilty, L.M.: Information Technology and Sustainability. Essays on the Relationship between
ICT and Sustainable Development. Books on demand, ISBN: 9783837019704 (2008)
2. Murugesan, S.: Harnessing Green IT: principles and practices. IT Prof. 10(1), 24–33 (2008)
3. Herzog, C., Pierson, J.-M., Lefèvre, L.: Link Between Academia and Industry for Green IT.
ICT for Sustainability (ICT4S 2013), Zurich, Switzerland, 14/-16 February 2013, ETH Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology, pp. 259–264, (2013) ISBN I978-3-906031-24-8
4. Herzog, C., Pierson, J.-M., Lefèvre, L.: Towards modelling the research in Green IT with
agents. In: 27th International Conference on Environmental Informatics for Environmental
Protection, Sustainable Development and Risk Management, EnviroInfo 2013, Hamburg,
Germany, 2–4 September 2013 (EnviroInfo 2013), pp. 335–341

