Consolidation, Colocation, Virtualization,
and Cloud Computing: The Impact
of the Changing Structure of Data Centers
on Total Electricity Demand
Ralph Hintemann

Abstract The IT industry in general and data centers in particular are subject to a
very dynamic development. Within a few years, the structure and components of
data centers can change completely. This applies not only to individual data
centers (see [27], in this volume), but also to the structure of the data center market
at the national or international level. The sizes, types, and locations of data centers
are changing significantly because of trends such as the consolidation of data
centers, the increasing use of colocation data centers, virtualization, and cloud
computing. The construction of large cloud data centers, for example Google in
Finland, Facebook in Sweden, or Microsoft in Ireland, is an example of these
developments. In consequence, there is an impact on the overall energy demand of
data centers. This chapter discusses these developments and the impact on the
overall energy consumption of data centers using the example of Germany.





Keywords Data center Energy consumption Consolidation
Hosting Cloud computing Virtualization Typology







 Colocation 

1 Introduction
Data centers account for a considerable share of electricity consumption. Koomey
assumes that they consumed 1.1–1.5 % of global electricity in 2010 and estimates
that the figure for the US is between 1.7 and 2.2 %. What is more, global electricity consumption increased by 56 % from 2005 to 2010 [1]. The Borderstep
Institute calculated that data centers are responsible for 1.8 % of total electricity
consumption in Germany [2]. In places with a very high density of data centers,
such as the Frankfurt area, their share of power consumption is even on the order
R. Hintemann (&)
Borderstep Institute, Berlin, Germany
e-mail: hintemann@borderstep.de
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
L.M. Hilty and B. Aebischer (eds.), ICT Innovations for Sustainability,
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 310,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09228-7_7

125

126

R. Hintemann

of 20 % [3]. The power consumption of major data centers, such as Facebook’s in
Finland or Microsoft’s in Chicago, is more than 50 MW [4, 5]. These figures and
examples reveal two things:
• Data centers are of high significance with regard to total electricity
consumption;
• Besides total power consumption, the development of the structure of data
centers is important, e.g. are more large or small data centers added, what is the
purpose of the data centers, and where are they located geographically?
IT trends such as data center consolidation, virtualization, and cloud computing, as
well as increasing use of colocation opportunities are giving rise to changes in the
structure of data centers. This chapter deals with the impacts of these structural
changes on the energy consumption of data centers overall.
Such an analysis must first confront three major challenges. Firstly, in some cases
it is not quite clear how the term ‘‘data center’’ is defined. To date, there is no
uniform definition accepted by scholars and practitioners alike [6]. Various definitions exist, depending on how data centers are used [7, pp. 5–6]. An important
reason for this is that the sizes and purposes of data centers vary considerably. At
one end of the scale, there are small entities with a few elements, e.g. the server room
in a medium-sized engineering company with, say, twenty servers. At the other, we
find factory buildings the size of a soccer field housing tens of thousands of servers,
storage systems, and network devices and involving comprehensive infrastructure
such as equipment for cooling and climate control, power distribution, uninterruptible power supply, emergency generators, fire safety, access control, etc.
The second challenge is the high speed of investment in ICT in general and in
data centers in particular. The structure of data centers is changing very rapidly
because of new hardware and software technologies, new IT concepts such as
cloud computing, and new approaches with regard to infrastructure, such as direct
free cooling. Studies and publications on data centers prepared 4–5 years ago
[8–12] no longer reflect current reality adequately.
The third challenge when analyzing the structure of data centers is obtaining
up-to-date information about them. There are no official statistics concerning data
centers. The opportunities to obtain information by means of surveys are also
limited because data center operators consider them to be ‘‘critical infrastructure.’’
Failures or malfunctions would have strong economic impacts on the company
which could even threaten its existence. From the perspective of data center
operators, it is therefore rational to provide as little information as possible about
the location, components, and structures of their data centers. A further methodological problem is the fact that data centers are not economic entities of their
own. In many cases, they merely have a supporting function, for example within
companies of a particular sector (engineering, finance, chemistry, etc.). What is
more, the quality of the relatively small amount of information available about
data centers is difficult to assess. The results of analyses are often contradictory.
One reason for this is surely that there are different definitions of what constitutes a
data center.

Consolidation, Colocation, Virtualization, and Cloud Computing …

127

It can be said that hardly any robust data and statistics on the structure of data
centers are available. Therefore, studies to date on the energy use of data centers
usually focus on analyzing individual data centers (e.g. [13–16]) or determining
the total electricity consumption of a country or region [1, 2, 8–10, 12, 17, 18].
Despite these challenges, I attempt to analyze and evaluate the relevance of the
structure of data centers for total energy use in this chapter, using the following
approach. First, the methodology will be described, followed by an introduction of
a typology of data centers. This typology permits more detailed analysis of the
structure of data centers as well as the determination of implications of structural
changes on energy consumption. Finally, some structural changes will be presented, using the development from 2008 to 2013 as an example, and impacts on
data centers’ energy consumption will be discussed. In order to illustrate the data,
which are valid overall, with empirical data, and to provide a foundation for the
results, I have selected Germany as an example, as comprehensive data are
available at the Borderstep Institute.

2 Methodology
For this chapter, a data center is defined as follows [12, pp. 13]:
A data center is a building or space which houses the central data processing technology of
one or more organizations. It must consist at least of a room of its own with a secure
electricity supply as well as climate control.

Various information sources were used to obtain valid information about the
current structures and components of data centers and their changes:
• A model of the structure of data centers in Germany is available at the
Borderstep Institute. The model forms groups of data centers according to size
and describes the average IT hardware equipment for each group as well as
infrastructure elements such as climate control solutions, uninterruptible power
supply, etc. The model was elaborated for the base year 2008 in a study
commissioned by the German Federal Environment Agency [12] and has been
developed further and updated annually in the context of the project Adaptive
Computing for Green Data Centers (AC4DC, www.ac4dc.com). Above all, the
model uses current sales figures for servers as well as storage and network
components compiled by the market analysis firm Techconsult [19] and other
available data from market studies (e.g. [20–23]). In addition, interviews with
experts in the field have been conducted several times a year as well as annual
surveys of data center equipment suppliers and data center operators.
• A database of the major data centers in Germany was established at the
Borderstep Institute in order to test the model and develop it further. Using the
model, the number of data centers with more than 500 m2 of IT floor space was
estimated at approximately 300. Internet and literature searches and especially

128

R. Hintemann

confidential information obtained directly from operators, planners, and
equipment suppliers of data centers have made it possible to identify and
describe two-thirds of them with regard to their location, operator, and purpose.
The following deliberations are based on the results of the data center model as
well as the existing database on data centers.

3 Typologies of Data Centers
Before analyzing the structure of data centers, we must first clarify which types of
data centers are to be differentiated. In the project AC4DC, a typology of data
centers was developed which was used for this chapter as well. The typology
(see Fig. 1) is oriented toward the type of IT use and includes two dimensions: the
data centers’ size and their purpose. The purposes of data centers include colocation data centers, cloud and hosting data centers, private data centers, and public
data centers. As data centers may serve several of these purposes, they are allocated according to their main purpose. The gray areas show which sizes are typical
of the various data center purposes. Data center size is differentiated between the
categories ‘‘server closet,’’ ‘‘server room,’’ ‘‘small data center,’’ ‘‘medium data
center,’’ and ‘‘large data center.’’

Fig. 1 Typology of data centers (overview) (Source Borderstep)

Consolidation, Colocation, Virtualization, and Cloud Computing …

129

Commercial providers rent out infrastructure capacity for outsourcing or situating
servers in colocation data centers. The spectrum of services offered there includes
providing floor space or rack space for IT hardware, electricity supply, cooling,
access control, fire protection, etc. as well as connections to existing telecommunications networks. Colocation data centers’ customers are companies and institutions
that, for various reasons, cannot or prefer not to operate their own infrastructure.
Cloud computing and hosting data centers offer their customers services via the
Internet, e.g. providing IT infrastructure (e.g. virtual or dedicated servers, storage
space on the Internet), platform services, or software as a service. Many experts
see a difference between cloud computing and hosting with regard to the type of
customer relationship. As a rule, hosting companies have one-on-one relationships
and longer-term contracts with their customers, whereas typical cloud services are
offered to large numbers of customers simultaneously as standard products. Usage
of cloud services can vary greatly, both in terms of time and amount [20]. There
are no clear boundaries between cloud computing and hosting, and in practice, the
two types of data centers are very similar. For this reason, they are considered as a
single category in this chapter.
Private data centers are data centers used by companies for their own purposes.
These data centers run services such as e-mail, database systems, Internet platforms,
software to support business processes, e.g. bookkeeping, controlling, distribution,
procurement, production, warehousing, and human resources, or software employed
for research and development. The components and structures of the data centers
and the types of services differ widely, depending on the company’s activities. This
category also includes data centers whose operators offer their customers complex
services on the basis of their (the data centers’) IT infrastructure.
Public data centers are data centers run by public institutions or state-owned
companies. They often run services similar to those in private data centers. The
public data centers also include data centers at universities and municipal or
regional data centers offering services for public-sector customers. These services
range from colocation to cloud and hosting to taking on entire business processes.

4 Implications of Various Types of Data Center
on Electricity Demand
4.1 Colocation Providers’ Data Centers
There are more than 200 providers of colocation facilities in Germany, and they
are often very large—roughly 45 % of the data centers in the category ‘‘large data
centers’’ are colocation data centers. The biggest colocation data centers in
Germany have more than 50,000 m2 of IT floor space and power consumption on
the order of 50 MW. Large colocation space providers generally operate internationally and offer sizable data center capacities in practically all major German
cities.

130

R. Hintemann

According to Borderstep Institute surveys, IT floor space in colocation data
centers in Germany increased by 25 % between 2008 and 2013 and now accounts
for approx. 18 %, or about 320,000 m2, of total data center space in Germany.
In the future, the space provided by colocation data centers is expected to increase
significantly. The Broadgroup assumes that gross data center floor space offered by
third-party data center providers will grow by 33 % between 2012 and 2016 [21].
With regard to the implications of colocation data centers as a type of data
center on energy consumption, three important factors must be mentioned. First,
electricity costs are a very significant factor for colocation data center providers,
and for some colocation providers, they account for approx. one-third of total
costs. As a result, operators of colocation data centers are highly interested in
improving energy efficiency. Therefore, newly built colocation data centers are
planned for high efficiency. Second, colocation providers’ strong interest in energy
efficiency is countered by the fact that they have no direct influence on their
customers’ IT usage. This largely rules out comprehensive optimization of IT
hardware and data center infrastructure, for example. Third, colocation providers
are not entirely free to act when implementing modernization measures for
improving efficiency, since they serve several customers in a single data center and
must generally guarantee continuous operation. While data centers with just a
single IT user can modernize their infrastructure relatively well when replacing IT
components, this is practically impossible if many customers are involved, as they
will replace their IT hardware at various different times.

4.2 Data Centers Operated by Cloud Computing
and Hosting Providers
There are more than 2,000 hosting providers in Germany. With few exceptions
(1und1, Strato, and Hetzner), the providers whose only service is hosting are small
or medium-sized companies. In addition, there are also a number of large and
internationally operating providers such as IT manufacturers (HP, IBM, Fujitsu,
etc.), service providers (T-Systems, Atos, Unisys, Capgenimi, etc.), and cloud
providers established specifically to provide these services (Amazon, Google,
Salesforce, etc.) [20]. Some cloud and hosting data centers are very large. More
and more mega-data centers with tens of thousands of servers are being established
around the globe, e.g. by Google, Facebook, or Microsoft. According to Borderstep surveys, roughly one-quarter of the large data centers in Germany are cloud
and hosting data centers. Their IT floor space is constantly increasing. For
example, Deutsche Telekom built a cloud data center in Magdeburg measuring
24,000 m2 [24]. Overall, high growth is forecast for the market in cloud services.
The Experton Group expects annual growth of 40 % from 2011 to 2015 [20].
Borderstep Institute surveys show that the IT floor space of cloud and hosting
data centers in Germany increased by approx. 25 % from 2008 to 2013, and that

Consolidation, Colocation, Virtualization, and Cloud Computing …

131

these 250,000 m2 account for approx. 14 % of all IT floor space in Germany. It is
safe to assume that this market will continue to develop dynamically in the future,
especially because of the strong growth in cloud computing.
The most important implications of this type of data center on the development
of energy efficiency can be summarized as follows. Energy costs account for a
high proportion of the total costs of cloud and hosting data centers, usually
between 10 and 20 %. Therefore, there is a relatively strong incentive to implement energy-efficiency measures. Hosting and cloud data centers often have a
relatively homogeneous IT structure. This makes more extensive efficiency measures possible, ranging from efficient cooling technologies such as direct free
cooling to sourcing hardware constructed specifically for this purpose, as in the
case of Google, for example [11, pp. 6]. Thus, modern cloud data centers attain
power usage effectiveness (PUE) figures on the order of 1.1–1.2 [4, 25]. PUE is a
measure of the efficiency of data center infrastructure, indicating the ratio between
energy use of the entire data center per year and the IT hardware’s energy use. The
closer the PUE value is to 1, the more efficient the data center’s infrastructure.

4.3 Data Centers Used by Companies Themselves
(‘‘Private Data Centers’’)
The category with the largest number of data centers comprises data centers used
by companies for their own purposes. Almost 90 % of data centers in the categories server closet and server room fall into this category. Private data centers
account for just under 60 % of total data center space in Germany. The components and structures of the data centers and the types of services provided vary
greatly, depending on the company’s activities.
In Germany, large data centers with power consumption in the megawatt range
are operated by companies in the financial, telecommunications, or automobile
sectors, for example. Approx. 20 % of the large data centers fall into this category.
When considering implications of data center type on the development of
energy efficiency, it is important to note that smaller data centers often have only
minor incentives to increase energy efficiency. Especially because of the higher
proportion of management costs in smaller data centers, the fraction accounted for
by electricity is relatively low, often on the order of 5 % or less. In relation to the
total costs of a company in which operating the data center accounts for just a
small share of the company’s activities, the energy costs for running the data
center are generally very low. In addition, the expertise and resources for introducing energy efficiency measures in a data center are often not available in the
case of small locations.

132

R. Hintemann

4.4 Data Centers in Public Agencies and Other Public
Institutions (‘‘Public Data Centers’’)
The category of public data centers also includes a large number of locations that
tend to be smaller. It is reasonable to assume approx. 5,000 public data centers in
Germany in 2013. They account for approx. 10 % of the total space of all data
centers. The majority of public data centers is operated by municipalities. At the
federal level, there are approx. 1,000 data centers.
In recent years, public data centers have seen a trend toward concentration.
Public-sector service providers are now operating larger data centers in which the
tasks of the various municipal and regional authorities are concentrated. They
provide comprehensive IT services, but also hosting and colocation services.
Universities and research institutions usually also have a high demand for computing capacity, both for research in the natural sciences and engineering and for
operating their own websites as well as communication and online learning platforms. This capacity can be provided by means of high-performance computers
and computer clusters in data centers.
Concerning the implications of this type of data center on energy efficiency, it
can be stated that the operations of public data centers are often influenced by
goals that are not purely economic in nature, for example, the requirement to store
data within Germany. As increasing energy efficiency is a politically endorsed
goal, politics may also directly impact data center operations. For example, public
calls for tender often accord high importance to the issue of energy efficiency in
the procurement of new goods. Another example of direct political influence is the
goal adopted by the federal government to reduce the absolute amount of energy it
uses for IT by 40 % between 2008 and 2013 [10].

5 Development of Data Center Structure and Energy
Demand: The Example of Germany
What are the impacts of the structure of data centers on their energy consumption?
Answering this question involves considering how the distribution of data centers
by size has developed, using the example of Germany. Figure 2 shows the
development of IT floor space in the various categories of data centers. Growth of
data center space was relatively low through 2010, especially because of the
economic crisis, and has shown significant growth only since then. The growth
from 1.54 million m2 in 2008 to 1.76 million m2 in 2013 (annual average: approx.
2.7 %) is due almost exclusively to the increasing space provided in larger data
centers. The space in small locations such as server closets and server rooms has
even decreased. As mentioned above, a major part (approx. 51 %) of growth was
in colocation data centers and in cloud and hosting data centers.

Consolidation, Colocation, Virtualization, and Cloud Computing …

133

Fig. 2 Development of IT floor space in German data centers by group according to size (Source
Borderstep)

The development of energy consumption by servers and data centers in
Germany changed distinctly in 2008 (see Fig. 3). Total energy consumption
declined slightly from 10.1 TWh (terawatt hours) in 2008 to approx. 9.7 TWh in
2013. There are two main reasons for this: First, the growth in data centers’ energy
use was slower because of the economic crisis, similar to the development in other
fields of economic activity. Second, initial successes in energy efficiency have
been achieved—especially as a result of the increasing discussions about data
centers’ energy needs [1]. In particular the newly built large data centers are
distinctly more efficient than legacy data centers. According to a Borderstep survey conducted in February 2014, the PUE of good, new data centers in Germany is
currently between 1.2 and 1.5. Thus, they require over 25 % less energy than a
comparable legacy data center with a PUE of approx. 2, simply because of
increases in infrastructure energy efficiency.
Unfortunately, the available data does not yet permit detailed analysis of the
development of electricity consumption in the individual data center types broken
down by size and purpose of the data center. Further research is required here. Yet
there are many indications that a significant part of the efficiency gains were
attained by building new, large data centers—especially in the fields of colocation
as well as cloud and hosting. The federal government’s Green IT Initiative is also
responsible for a part of the reduction in data centers’ energy use. It can be
estimated on the basis of available data [26] that 25 % of the calculated absolute
decline in data centers’ energy use is due to the federal government’s data centers
alone.

134

R. Hintemann

Fig. 3 Development of energy consumption by servers and data centers (Source based on [12],
updated)

6 Summary, Discussion, and Outlook
The structure of data centers in Germany is changing, and this chapter has shown
the extent of this shift. The number of small locations has clearly decreased since
2008, while the number of larger data centers is increasing. The segment of data
centers with more than 5,000 m2 IT of floor space is growing particularly rapidly.
This growth is due especially to the increase in colocation as well as cloud and
hosting data centers. Since the proportion of electricity costs in relation to total
costs is relatively high for these two types of data centers, they have a major
incentive to use efficient technologies. It can be assumed that the colocation as
well as cloud and hosting market segments will continue to grow in the future. Yet
is is questionable whether this will result in a decrease in data centers’ total energy
use. First, there are certain limits to a further increase in energy efficiency in
colocation data centers, as discussed. Second, one must assume that cloud data
centers in particular will grow so much that their energy use will increase overall
in spite of improved efficiency. In light of the development to date, one must doubt
that the computing capacity in private data centers will be reduced to the same
extent as it is expanded in cloud data centers. Therefore, a significant rebound
effect in cloud computing is to be expected.
The deliberations in this chapter have clearly shown that there is a substantial
relationship between the structure of data centers and their energy consumption.
Research in this field is still in its infancy. Above all, it is necessary to continue

Consolidation, Colocation, Virtualization, and Cloud Computing …

135

improving the availability and quality of data on the components and structure of
data centers. Studies similar to this one for Germany must be conducted for other
countries and regions as well. The international distribution of data centers in
different locations is expected to be of major importance, not least because of the
different climatic conditions.

References
1. Koomey, J.G.: Growth in data center electricity use 2005–2010. A report by Analytics Press,
completed at the request of The New York Times. www.analyticspress.com/datacenters.html
(2011). Accessed on 2 Mar 2012
2. Hintemann, R., Fichter, K.: Server und Rechenzentren in Deutschland im Jahr 2012. http://
www.borderstep.de/pdf/Kurzbericht_Rechenzentren_in_Deutschland_2012__09_04_2013.
pdf (2013). Accessed 9 Feb 2014
3. Mainova.: Zukunft: Eine Nahaufnahme (Imagebroschüre). http://www.mainova-unterneh
men.de/imagebroschuere/data/download/ Mainova_Imagebroschuere_022013_dt.pdf (2013).
Accessed 20 May 2013
4. Melanchthon, D.: Die Microsoft Rechenzentren. Basis für den Erfolg in der Wolke. http://
techday.blob.core.windows.net/techsummitcloud/TechSummit_2011_-_Die_Microsoft_
Rechenzentren.pdf (2011). Accessed 2 Feb 2014
5. Windeck, C.: Facebook nimmt schwedisches Rechenzentrum in Betrieb. http://www.heise.
de/ix/meldung/Facebook-nimmt-schwedisches-Rechenzentrum-in-Betrieb-1886765.html
(2013). Accessed 2 Feb 2014
6. Cremer, C., Eichhammer, W., Friedewald, M., Georgieff, P., Rieth-Hoerst, S., Schlomann, B.,
Zoche, P., Aebischer, B., Huser, A.: Energy consumption of information and communication
technology (ICT) in Germany up to 2010, Zusammenfassung des Endberichts für das
Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Arbeit (heute Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und
Energie) (Summary for the German Federal Ministry for Economy and Energy). Karlsruhe/
Zürich, Jan 2003
7. Fichter, K.: Zukunftsmarkt energieeffiziente Rechenzentren (Future market energy efficient
data centers), Studie im Auftrag des Bundesministeriums für Umwelt. Naturschutz und
Reaktorsicherheit, Berlin (2008)
8. Koomey, J.G.: Estimating total power consumption by servers in the U.S. and the world.
Final Report, Feb 2007
9. Koomey, J.G.: Worldwide electricity used in data centers. Environ. Res. Lett. 3, 034008
(2008). http://23.23.215.240/libraries/about-extreme/1748-9326_3_3_034008.pdf. Accessed
8 May 2014
10. BMWi.: Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Technologie (ed.): Abschätzung des
Energiebedarfs der weiteren Entwicklung der Informationsgesellschaft. Abschlussbericht
erstellt vom Fraunhofer-Institut für Zuverlässigkeit und Mikrointegration (Fraunhofer IZM)
in Kooperation mit dem Fraunhofer-Institut für System—und Innovations Forschung.
Fraunhofer ISI, Berlin, Karlsruhe (2009)
11. TU Berlin–Technische Universität Berlin, Innovationszentrum Energie (IZE). (ed.):
Konzeptstudie zur Energie—und Ressourceneffizienz im Betrieb von Rechenzentren.
Berlin (2008)
12. Hintemann, R., Fichter, K.: Materialbestand in deutschen Rechenzentren—Eine
Bestandsaufnahme zur Ermittlung von Ressourcen—und Energieeinsatz. Herausgegeben
vom UBA. http://www.umweltdaten.de/publikationen/fpdf-l/4037.pdf (2010). Accessed 9
Feb 2014

