Gamification and Sustainable
Consumption: Overcoming
the Limitations of Persuasive
Technologies
Martina Z. Huber and Lorenz M. Hilty

Abstract The current patterns of production and consumption in the industrialized
world are not sustainable. The goods and services we consume cause resource
extractions, greenhouse gas emissions and other environmental impacts that are
already affecting the conditions of living on Earth. To support the transition toward
sustainable consumption patterns, ICT applications that persuade consumers to
change their behavior into a ‘‘green’’ direction have been developed in the field of
Persuasive Technology (PT). Such persuasive systems, however, have been criticized for two reasons. First, they are often based on the assumption that information (e.g., information on individual energy consumption) causes behavior
change, or a change in awareness and attitude that then changes behavior. Second,
PT approaches assume that the designer of the system starts from objective criteria
for ‘‘sustainable’’ behavior and is able to operationalize them in the context of the
application. In this chapter, we are exploring the potential of gamification to
overcome the limitations of persuasive systems. Gamification, the process of using
game elements in a non-game context, opens up a broader design space for ICT
applications created to support sustainable consumption. In particular, a gamification-based approach may give the user more autonomy in selecting goals and
relating individual action to social interaction. The idea of gamification may also
help designers to view the user’s actions in a broader context and to recognize the

M.Z. Huber  L.M. Hilty (&)
Department of Informatics, University of Zurich, Binzühlestr. 14,
CH-8050 Zurich, Switzerland
e-mail: hilty@ifi.uzh.ch
M.Z. Huber
e-mail: mhuber@ifi.uzh.ch
L.M. Hilty
Empa, Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology,
St. Gallen, Switzerland
Centre for Sustainable Communications CESC, KTH Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm, Sweden
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
L.M. Hilty and B. Aebischer (eds.), ICT Innovations for Sustainability,
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 310,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09228-7_22

367

368

M.Z. Huber and L.M. Hilty

relevance of different motivational aspects of social interaction, such as competition and cooperation. Based on this discussion we define basic requirements to
be used as guidance in gamification-based motivation design for sustainable
consumption.



Keywords Gamification Sustainable consumption
Technology paternalism Collaborative software



 Persuasive technology 

1 Introduction
The goods and services consumed in industrial societies are the main cause of
global environmental impact. Sustainable consumption and production aims at
changing ‘‘unsustainable patterns of consumption and production’’ and requires
‘‘fundamental changes in the way societies produce and consume’’ in order to
‘‘achieve global sustainable development’’ [1, p. 12].
ICT applications have been developed to support users in this imperative
change towards sustainable consumption. Specifically, eco-feedback technologies
and so-called Persuasive Sustainability Systems (PSSs), which are Persuasive
Technologies (PTs) in the field of sustainability, aim at inducing users to more
sustainable behavior. Whereas eco-feedback technologies have primarily focused
on raising awareness by providing information on measurable aspects of sustainability, PSSs go beyond this and suggest predefined actions typically designed to
achieve a rational goal. Within current implementations these two technologies
usually merge, as in the cases of UbiGreen [2], a mobile phone application supporting ‘‘green’’ choices of transport modes or features in Toyota cars which
encourage eco-friendly driving [3]. Recently, community-based approaches
encouraging environmentally friendly actions, particularly in regard to reducing
residential electricity usage have increasingly been discussed within the field of
ICT. Eco-feedback and PT have been expanded to the Internet, sharing usage data
and comparing it with predefined benchmarks and social norms. Examples include
WattsUp [4], which focuses on social norms and StepGreen.org [5], which additionally suggests actions that ‘‘may save money or energy’’ (p. 2).
In spite of the widely acknowledged desirability of encouraging sustainable
behavior, PT has been criticized for several limitations. These involve, in particular, an oversimplified and isolated view on behavior due to focusing on clearly
measurable aspects, the inherent technology paternalism and the lack of solution
building [6, 7]. These limitations will be explained in more detail later.
The design of ICT solutions to support people in behavior change needs to be
approached in a more comprehensive way. Instead of focusing only on predefined
solutions, the context of the process causing the consumption has to be analyzed.
This requires additional engagement strategies, the (social) context of an action
and the user’s cognitive, emotional and social capabilities. Research has

Gamification and Sustainable Consumption: Overcoming …

369

shown that games have a high potential for engaging people in a wide variety of
ways.
Games tap into the world of ‘‘fun’’, affect emotions and have the ability to
involve users more deeply. At the same time they have the potential to motivate
users toward a specific course of action without dogmatism [6]. Gamification is the
use of game or game design elements in non-game contexts and has recently
become of increasing interest within ICT. ‘‘Assuming that people like to play but
are confronted in their everyday life with non-motivational activities, gamification
is the process that induces motivation in those activities’’ [8, p. 3]. Gamification
does not say anything about how to use game elements in the non-game context or
what the non-game context has to be. As a result gamification-based approaches
can be found in a wide range of applications. Approaches include loyalty programs
(e.g. collecting miles in frequent-flyer programs or stamps in super markets),
systems encouraging customers to share information (e.g. showing progress bars
and scores such as in LinkedIn [9] and ResearchGate [10]), or motivating consumers to eco-friendly driving behavior (e.g. providing information on average
consumption as Toyota does [3]) or to reduce electricity consumption (e.g., by
enabling normative comparison as done by Opower [11]).
As a matter of fact, all of these gamification-based approaches are rooted in
PT-based design. Depending on the perspective, it could also be argued that recent
PT-based approaches include gamification-based ideas (see for example [2–4]).
Regardless of where the line between PT and gamification is drawn, all the
examples previously mentioned inherit the limitations of PT-based design.
In this chapter, we elaborate requirements intended to guide the design of a
gamification-based approach, which motivates sustainable consumption while
overcoming the present limitations of PT. Sustainable consumption is embedded
in, and influenced by, a complex structure of regulations, communities, large
enterprises, and other stakeholders. All of these entities affect a consumer’s
decision-making process and in their turn may be influenced by it. We believe that
in order to achieve sustainable consumption it is important to take into account
the influences of all these entities. Our research focuses on the potential role of
gamification in this context.
The chapter is organized as follows: Sect. 2 provides some background on PT
and discusses the major limitations of PT; we focus on limitations we consider to
be relevant, at least in the context of sustainable consumption. Section 3 gives an
overview of gamification. Section 4 provides examples of first attempts to introduce gamification into the field of sustainable consumption. Section 5 elaborates
basic requirements for gamification-based approaches to sustainable consumption
that can guide designers who want to overcome the limitations of PT-based
approaches. Finally, Sect. 6 provides preliminary conclusions and identifies open
research questions.

370

M.Z. Huber and L.M. Hilty

2 Persuasive Technology
2.1 Background
The concepts we introduce below are based on Fogg’s work on captology [12]—
the study of computers as persuasive technology.
Persuasion. Fogg defines persuasion as ‘‘an attempt to change attitudes or
behavior or both (without using coercion or deception)’’ (p. 15). Thereby, intention
to change attitudes or behaviors is seen as a necessary condition for persuasion.
The goal of persuasion is to generate intentionally planned attitude and behavior
changes [12, 13]. ‘‘Self-persuasion’’ is a specific form of persuasion in which a
person already agrees with the values directing the behavior change and the persuasive system is used in order to ‘‘overcome a weakness of the will’’ [14, p. 645].
Persuasive Systems. Based on the definition of ‘‘persuasion’’, PT can be defined
as an ‘‘interactive computer system [technology] designed to change people’s
attitudes and behaviors’’ [13, p. 1]. Thereby, PT ‘‘focuses on the attitude and
behavior changes intended by the designers of interactive technology products’’
[13, p. 17]. As an example, Fig. 1 shows a speed monitoring system. The
underlying goal is to raise drivers’ awareness of their speed and implicitly suggesting driving at the maximal indicated speed limit. Specific applications of PT
are usually called ‘‘persuasive systems’’. The application of PT in the domain of
ecological sustainability has created the special case of ‘‘persuasive sustainability
systems’’ (PSSs). Contemporary PSSs are described as ‘‘technologies that sense,
interpret, and respond to human activity by providing information intended to
change the behavior of individual consumers according to a metric selected in a
top-down fashion usually defined as reducing resource consumption’’ [6, p. 950].
Eco-feedback Technology. Eco-feedback technology provides information (e.g.
by mobile phones, ambient displays, or online visualizations) about individual or
group behavior and its environmental effects. These applications are based on the
Fig. 1 Information
comparison as a persuasion
technique (Source [59])

Gamification and Sustainable Consumption: Overcoming …

371

assumption that their users lack awareness and understanding of the environmental
effects of their everyday behavior [15, p. 1999]. Research on eco-feedback has its
roots in environmental psychology and—as some authors claim—may improve PT
research [15]. Whereas eco-feedback systems have the character of raising
awareness, PSSs tend to persuade consumers to change their behavior in order to
achieve a specific system goal.
Communicating with versus Communicating through Computers. Persuasive
and eco-feedback technologies are important in human-computer interaction (HCI)
research. In HCI, the focus is mainly on people’s interaction with computer systems [13]. Fogg makes a distinction between this view and the paradigm of
computer-mediated communication (CMC). In the first case, the system is viewed
as a ‘‘participant in the interaction and possible source of persuasion’’, able to
‘‘proactively seek to motivate and influence users, drawing on strategies and
routines programmed into it [e.g. by incentives or negotiations].’’ [13, p. 16].
In the second case, the focus is on people’s interaction through computer
systems, which are used ‘‘as a channel that allows humans to interact with
each other (e.g. instant messaging and electronic whiteboards for collaboration)’’
[13, p. 16]. While captology—the study of computers as persuasive technology—
investigates how people are persuaded when interacting with computers, we
consider that both aspects are equally relevant to a gamification-based approach.
The Scope of Consumption. Consumer behavior has been a subject of research in
the fields of evolutionary psychology, anthropology and sociology. In a nutshell,
there is high evidence that consumer behavior is mainly influenced by
• Symbolic roles and cultural meanings of consumer goods (e.g. McCracken in
[16])
• Social and sexual competition (e.g. Penn in [17])
• Continual process of constructing and reconstructing personal identity (e.g.
Soron in [18])
Individual decisions and actions are rooted in routines and based on affective and
emotional bursts. They evolve from the complex structure of socio-cultural and
socio-economic influences and rely on restrictions due to constraints (e.g. regulations) or current unavailability of possibilities (e.g., due to low income).
PT is usually based on the implicit assumption that information causes behavior
change—or at least a change in awareness and attitude that will then cause
behavior change. Against the background of the views cited, this looks like a
reversion to the era of psychological behaviorism.

372

M.Z. Huber and L.M. Hilty

2.2 Limitations of PT-Based Approaches to Sustainable
Consumption
In this subsection, we present an overview of aspects of PT-based approaches
discussed in the literature with a focus on issues we consider particularly limiting
in the context of sustainable consumption.
Focus on Measurable Effects. PT-based approaches applied in the field of sustainability usually rely on measurable effects declared as sustainability indicators,
for example how much of a resource such as electric energy has been used. The
measured data, typically in regard to a benchmark, usually works as a trigger for
system actions (e.g. a list of predefined ‘‘solutions’’ such as turning off the lights),
with the intention of persuading consumers to move toward the system goal (such
as reducing energy consumption).
Measurements are becoming more and more fine-grained, allowing more
tailored interventions by PT. In the domain of residential electricity consumption,
an approach called Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring (NILM) is becoming popular.
The goal of NILM is to recognize household appliances based on their ‘‘energy
signature’’. Machine learning algorithms applied for this purpose have been
improved over the last years. However, accuracy is still an issue, especially if
appliances are new and/or have similar signatures [19] (e.g., dryer and oven [20]).
Furthermore, satisfactory answers to privacy concerns are still missing [21].
Despite improvements in such technologies, with a too narrow focus on measured output, even with 100 % accuracy in NILM, interpretation of the meaning
attached to an action (e.g. reason, intention and kind of action) and analysis of the
process causing the consumption become very difficult or even impossible.
Assumption of Rational Choice. PT-based approaches are often based on the
implicit assumption that consumers are rational actors whose only goal is to
optimize their activities based on their preferences and knowledge [6]. ‘‘Rational
choice models assume that human behavior is regulated by a systematic process of
evaluating expected utility.’’ [15, p. 2000]. Under this assumptions rational actors
in any given situation only take actions that provide the biggest personal gain at
the least personal cost. Evidence shows that ‘‘ordinary people in ordinary situations are simply not capable of processing all the cognitive information required
for so-called ‘rational’ choices.’’ [22, p. 36]. Benkler [23] argues that under the
homo economicus assumption, volunteer work for peer-production projects such as
Wikipedia [24] would not exist. Even though there are people who show a
behavior based on purely selfish choices—a limited form of rational choice—,
research has shown that this applies to only one third of the population [23].
Feeding back data from measurable aspects of sustainability makes sense under
the assumption of purely rationally motivated consumers. However, consumers are
diversely motivated, and the interpretation of change in measured output under the
isolated assumptions of rational choices loses sight of the broader motivational

Gamification and Sustainable Consumption: Overcoming …

373

aspects of human behavior, and may lead to ineffective action triggers produced by
the system (e.g. predefined ‘‘solutions’’ which have no meaning to consumer).
Insufficient Account of Individual Differences and Social Context. PT-based
approaches are for the most part built on a foundation that information will trigger
a predetermined interpretation and action in all consumers. This assumption can
only be made if consumers are seen as identical and isolated agents. In reality,
though, consumers come with a ‘‘variety of backgrounds, desires, and skillsets’’
[25, p. 225] and their decisions are influenced by their individual and collective
identity. Identity in this context is ‘‘the meanings one has as a group member, as a
role-holder, or as a person’’ and part of the self which emerges from social
interactions [26, p. 8]. According to Greenwald and Pratkanis [27], the self consists of three different aspects:
• public: ‘people [parents, peers, authorities] think I…’,
• private: ‘I [my inner audience for behavior] think I…’,
• collective: ‘my family [reference group] thinks I…’.
The development and influential power of these aspects depend on cultural variation, specifically on the complexity, the level of individualism, and the looseness
of a culture. Based on this view of humanity, it can be assumed that the more all
three dimensions are developed, the more likely it is that people will express their
private self [28]. No individual self can exist without social relations. Mead views
the self as ‘‘something which has a development; it is not initially there, at birth,
but arises in the process of social experience and activity (…)’’ [29, p. 1]. Baumeister and Leary point out the importance of the need to belong, which ‘‘can be
considered a fundamental human motivation’’ [30, p. 521].
Within the design structure of PT-based approaches, while focusing on measurable aspects of sustainability and assuming consumers are purely rationally
motivated, it makes sense to consider consumers as uniform agents. However,
ignoring the complex interaction between the individual, groups and society locks
out major consumer segments and may not lead to solutions that can sustain
motivation over a long period.
Paradigm of Raising Awareness and Changing Attitudes. PT-based approaches
are typically designed following the paradigm that raising awareness and changing
attitudes are the main drivers for behavior change. Research, however, has shown
that behavior change does not necessarily come from raised awareness [31], nor
from a change in attitude [32]. In fact, the actual influence of awareness on any
change in behavior is usually unclear since other factors may also have played a
[unknown] role [6]. Empirical results suggest that some behaviors are induced
neither by attitude nor intention; on the contrary, observations have shown that
‘‘although the attitude-to-behavior connection is not very substantial, the behaviorto-attitude link has been shown to be quite strong’’ [32, p. 253]. For example,
‘‘people may recycle simply as a result of changes in municipal waste collection
services, without ever having decided that recycling is a good thing’’ [22, p. viii].

374

M.Z. Huber and L.M. Hilty

A too narrow focus on awareness and attitude, assuming purely reactive consumers, misses the power on consumer’s decisions deriving from a broad field of
various influences. As pointed out before, influences derive from structures into
which consumers are integrated such as communities, major corporations, rules
and regulations. Moreover, purely focusing on awareness and attitude misses the
motivational power given by pro-active engagement opportunities.
Inherent Technology Paternalism. PT-based approaches applied in the field of
sustainability are mostly based on the implicit assumption that the designers of the
application start from objective criteria for ‘‘sustainable’’ behavior and are able to
operationalize them in the application context. The evaluation of the consumer’s
actions according to these criteria is delegated to the system in order to automatically
rate the impact of an action and to recommend alternatives. In this process, ‘‘the
designer seems to be de facto more knowledgeable about sustainability than the users
of PSSs’’ [6, p. 953]. This attitude is referred to as ‘‘technology paternalism’’.
Paternalism is a concept used in ethics, describing an attitude involving imposition of
solutions to assumed problems on other persons even without their consent.
The underlying ethical dilemma arises from the fact that an imposed solution on
one side clearly ‘‘violates the autonomy of the other person’’. On the other hand,
‘‘by not imposing [the solution] one may not do the best possible in the interest of
the other’’ [33].

2.3 Potential for Improvement
PT persuades people rather than creating opportunities for negotiation, reflection
and self-conviction. Thereby, the question arises ‘‘where to draw the fine line
between persuasion and manipulation.’’ [14, p. 634]. Furthermore, PT assumes
‘‘that the user has already understood and accepted the larger reason that the
technology inscribes’’ [7, p. 61].
Consequently there is room for innovation to tap a much greater potential for
motivating and supporting sustainable consumption through ICT- based solutions.

3 Gamification
In the field of residential energy consumption, systems with the goal of motivating
pro-environmental behaviors have evolved from eco-feedback technologies for
electricity consumption such as early ambient displays (e.g. The Power Aware
Cord [34]) and sophisticated remotely accessible In-Home Displays (IHD) to more
actively persuasive systems such as EcoIsland, ‘‘a system for persuading users to
reduce CO2 emissions’’ [35, p. 59]. Recently, especially because of the motivational and engaging character of games, gamification-based design has become of
increased interest in this field.

Gamification and Sustainable Consumption: Overcoming …

375

In the following we are going to outline basic design requirements to overcome
the limitations of PT to sustainable consumption. Gamification-based approaches
have been developed in different fields. The requirements may not be transferable to
all of them e.g. approaches to prevent adolescents from substance abuse and relationship violence [36] or to encourage engagement in online debate systems [37].
In Sect. 3.1 we give background information on gamification with a focus on
motivational aspects of games being of interest for gamification-based approaches
to sustainable consumption. To give a better understanding in how to apply the
theoretical background in the physical world Sect. 4 provides first examples to
introduce gamification into the field of sustainable consumption. Finally, Sect. 5
follows with an outline of basic requirements for these systems to overcome the
limitations of PT.

3.1 Background
Whereas the field of gamification has already been implicitly introduced over
the last decades, its terminology is new [38]. One of the most conclusive and
most frequently cited definitions of gamification is given by Deterding et al.:
‘‘Gamification refers to the use (rather than the extension) of design (rather than
game-based technology or other game-related practices) elements (rather than
full-fledged games) characteristic for games (rather than play or playfulness) in
non-game contexts (regardless of specific usage intentions, contexts, or media of
implementation).’’ [39, p. 13].
This definition gives a formal understanding of gamification, it does not restrict
the aim or scope of a gamification-based system. So far more common in loyalty
programs such as frequent flyer programs, recently, the field of gamification has
expanded beyond such programs and gained interest in another area: motivating
and engaging consumers.
The goal of gamification in this newer area is to engage consumers in the
process of developing their own behaviors, and it does this by ‘‘the process of
using game thinking and game mechanics’’ [38, p. 9].
Gamification does not necessarily require interaction with an ICT system, as the
examples of frequent flyer programs and discount stamps show. However, in the
following, we will implicitly refer to gamification as an ICT-based approach.
Playing or Gaming? According to Deterding and colleagues, playing (from the
Greek term ‘‘paidia’’) refers to a free form of expression, allowing improvisational
recombination of different behaviors and meanings, in contrast to gaming (from
the Latin term ‘‘ludus’’) [39]. However, there are no generally accepted definitions
of these concepts, even after millennia of thinking and talking about them [40].
In the words of Lehman and Witty: ‘‘The whole truth’ regarding play cannot be
known until the whole truth regarding life itself is known, for play is; not an

Fig. 2 Flow (Source author,
based on [46])

M.Z. Huber and L.M. Hilty
High

376

Challenge

Anxiety Zone
A

B

Low

Boredom Zone
Low

Skill Set

High

isolated phenomenon.’’ [41, p. 7]. We will rely on the following tentative definitions of the concept of game:
• ‘‘A game is a problem-solving activity, approached with a playful attitude’.
Thereby, ‘play’ is defined as ‘manipulation that satisfies curiosity.’’ [40, p. 37].
• ‘‘A game is a rule-based formal system with a variable and quantifiable outcome, where different outcomes are assigned different values, the player exerts
effort in order to influence the outcome, the player feels attached to the
outcome, and the consequences of the activity are optional and negotiable.’’
[42, p. 5].
Game Elements. Schell, based on various definitions of games, identifies ten
elements of a game: ‘‘Games are entered willfully, have goals, have conflict, have
rules, can be won and lost, are interactive, have challenges, create their own
internal value, engage players and are closed, formal systems’’ [40]. Similarly,
McGonigal proposes four defining traits which all games have in common: ‘‘a
goal, rules, a feedback system and voluntary participation’’ [43, p. 20].
The Motivational Power of Games. Despite there is no consensus on how to define
‘‘game’’, there is a wide consensus about the motivational power of games [44].
Motivational aspects are manifold, their power depends on diverse influences such as
context, interface design and genre, and they can be introduced by different means.
We will elaborate on crucial motivational aspects in the following subsections.
Flow. According to McGonigal, the power of a good game is that it ‘‘motivate[s]
us to participate more fully in whatever we’re doing’’ [43, p. 125]. In fact,
researchers in the area of neuropsychology have found evidence that playing video
games can release Dopamine, a neurotransmitter, which ‘‘may be involved in
learning, reinforcement of behavior, attention, sensorimotor integration and activation of the pleasure circuit’’ [45, p. 266]. This intense neurochemical activation
in our brain and body while playing a good game [43] has been referred to as state
of flow. Flow expresses a state of being completely absorbed in what one does [46].

Gamification and Sustainable Consumption: Overcoming …

377

Table 1 Illustration of bartle’s player types (based on [60])
Original player types
[61]

New implicit types [58]

New explicit types [58]

Achievers want to
gather as many points
as possible and level
up
Explorers prefer to
expose the game’s
internal machinations

Opportunists look around for
things to do and if they see an
opportunity, they take it. They
avoid obstacles
Hackers seek to discover new
phenomena by going where their
fancy takes them and have an
intuitive understanding of the
virtual world
Friends ‘‘interact with people
they know well already, have a
deep understanding of them, and
accept their quirks and foibles’’
Griefers love to attack and get in
your face. Their vague aim is to
acquire a substantial bad
reputation

Planners set a goal and aim to
achieve it. They perform actions
as part of a larger plan and work
around obstacles
Scientists actively form theories
and test
them. They methodically
acquire new knowledge and seek
to explain phenomena
Networkers make an effort to
find people with whom to
interact, learn from, and hang out

Socializers like to
connect with other
people
Killers like to impose
themselves on others

Politicians manipulate people
subtly through forethought and
foresight. They want to
contribute to the community and
get a substantial good reputation

It can be experienced within a small channel between anxiety and boredom and
depends on personal (player) skills in regard to a challenge (Fig. 2). Flow is
individually experienced and can happen in any kind of situation, including nongame activities.
According to this concept, a person (player) in position A (Fig. 2) will try to
improve her or his skills in order to reach the channel of flow for the chosen
challenge. This is illustrated in Fig. 2 by the solid arrow pointing from position A
to the right. A second possibility would be to choose an easier challenge (illustrated by the dashed arrow pointing from position A downwards (Fig. 2)), but in
practice this solution seems to be less likely [46]. By further improving the skills, a
challenge might be mastered and become boring. In this scenario, the person
(player) moves away from the flow channel and ends up at position B (Fig. 2). To
go back to the channel of flow, a harder challenge has to be chosen, indicated by
the solid arrow pointing from position B upwards (Fig. 2).
Player Types. Based on the observation that different players find different things
fun, Bartle developed an extended concept of different player types. In his basic
model he hypothesizes that four different player types do exist. In the extended
model he specified the player types by each two sub-types (an implicit and an
explicit one) (Table 1) and by the possibility that a player will change type over
time. Originally defined for players of Multi-User-Dungeon (MUD), a multiplayer
real-time virtual world, his framework is useful for various kinds of games.

378

M.Z. Huber and L.M. Hilty

Model of Skill Acquisition. Based on the model of skill acquisition [47, 48], people
seek mastery in whatever they do (e.g. losing weight). The underlying assumption
is, that by ‘‘acquiring a skill by means of instructions and experience’’ people
‘‘normally pass through five developmental stages’’—novice, competence, proficiency, expertise and mastery [47, p. 0].
Cooperation and Competition. Intra-group solidarity (cooperation) and inter-group
competition are two key aspects of human behavior [22] and two basic mechanisms
used in game design [49]. Whereas, in competition, ‘‘individuals or groups seek to
outplay others in accordance with the game rules’’ [50, p. 7], cooperation encourages
participation and collaboration; ‘‘the goal is not to win as a player but as a team of
players’’ [51, p. 253]. Both goal structures ‘‘can be widely implemented in a nongaming context’’ [49, p. 2005]. Moreover, it is also possible to compete with oneself in
order to become better now and in the future, compared to the past.
The high relevance of cooperation in motivating players has been demonstrated
by Massive Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games (MMORPG) [52], cooperative games [51], and collaborative game-based learning [50]. An online survey
related to player motivation provided data from 3,000 MMORPG players and
identified teamwork as an important social component for player motivation [52].
Results of a background questionnaire showed that if they had to choose between
cooperative and competitive games, 55 % of the 60 % 6–16 years old kids preferred cooperative games, while 77 % preferred games with both elements [51].
Learning. Learning, whether deliberately or inadvertently, is a key factor in
behavior change. ‘‘In the social learning system, new patterns of behavior can
be acquired through direct experience or by observing the behavior of others’’
[53, p. 3]. Together with modeling our behavior on what others do, this is suggested by research to be a more promising way for achieving behavior change than
raising awareness is [22]. People learn most effectively from models who are seen
as more successful by them [53], attractive to them, influential to them or alike
them [22]. Collaborative game-based learning builds on social learning and is
described as a game that ‘‘involves more than one player in gameplay with the
pedagogical intention to promote cooperative learning between those engaged in
the game.’’ (p. 4). Key factors for motivating collaborative learning are cooperation and a sense of belonging [50].

4 First Attempts to Introduce Gamification into the Field
of Sustainable Consumption
Early approaches including gamification-based ideas have mostly been developed
as prototypes with aspects from PT, eco-feedback technology, game design and
other related fields. The dominating application domain for these systems is found
in the home context, in particular with regard to domestic energy consumption.

Gamification and Sustainable Consumption: Overcoming …

379

In the following, we introduce two examples of prototypes, which often are
referred within literature and one example from the industry, all containing gamification-based aspects.

4.1 Domestic Energy Consumption
EcoIsland [35] is a ‘‘game-like application’’ addressing the final goal of reducing
domestic energy consumption within a household. In regard to a target CO2
emission level, which is set by each family, rising energy consumption is correspondingly visualized on an IHD by a rising sea level eventually threatening a
virtual island. Avatars representing the household members inhabit the island. Two
possibilities for stopping the sea level from rising are provided; either through
reduction of energy consumption or by acquiring emission rights. In order to
reduce energy consumption, household members can select actions from a list of
actions predefined by the system designer (such as turning down the air-conditioning). A lower sea level makes it possible to sell emission rights to other islands
(neighboring households). The virtual earnings can be use to decorate the island.
All neighbors are able to see all islands and all taken actions.

4.2 CO2 Emission Caused by Transportation
UbiGreen [2] is a mobile phone application which semi-automatically senses
means of transportation and provides corresponding information on the behavior
indicating CO2 emissions caused by taken choices. Small rewards are given to
those who take ‘‘green’’ choices (e.g. taking public transportation, carpooling or
walking). Feedback is provided over two different interfaces between which users
can choose. One shows a tree and the other a polar bear on a small iceberg. Both
tree and iceberg indicate green choices. Progress is shown by a sequence of
images. At the beginning the tree has no leaves and the iceberg, on which the polar
bear is standing is very small. When green means of transportation are chosen, the
tree gets more leaves and in the final stage bears apples. Correspondingly, the
iceberg gets bigger and harbors more animals (fish, seals, other polar bears), finally
the last picture shows northern lights above a large group of polar bears.

4.3 Eco-Friendly Driving
Toyota built a special feature into their Prius line [3], a miles-per-gallon meter,
showing the average miles per gallon since the last fill-up. This feature is claimed
to be the beginning of a trend called hypermiling [54], a competition where car

380

M.Z. Huber and L.M. Hilty

drivers try to drive as many miles as possible on one gallon. To do this they use
different techniques, such as adjusting their driving style, driving behind trucks or
driving when it’s not windy.

5 Requirements for a Gamification-Based Approach
to Sustainable Consumption
By ‘‘[attempting] to harness the motivational power of games and apply it to realworld problems’’ [55, p. 1], gamification offers opportunities for overcoming
limitations of PT in the domain of sustainable consumption.
Gamification by itself neither guides the designer through the identification of
relevant game design elements nor teaches how to use, apply, and combine these
elements (among themselves and within the context). ‘‘Yet despite the parallel
increase in research on fun, entertainment, and motivation in video game play, we
are still in want of theoretical models of the motivational pull of game elements’’
[56, p. 2].
In fact recent gamification-based approaches have been criticized for just
randomly applying game elements, neither considering the application context nor
the user’s background. This is why they ‘‘will fail to drive participation and sustain
user engagement’’ [57, p. 6]. Moreover, as pointed out in the previous section,
current gamification-based approaches usually inherit some fundamental limitations of PT-based approaches.
We therefore define four requirements that can help constraining the search
space for good design in the field of gamification-based approaches to sustainable
consumption. This set of requirements is derived from the results and perspectives
discussed in the preceding sections.

5.1 Requirement 1: Respecting Consumers as Individuals
Respecting consumers as individuals by enabling skill acquisition and multiple
levels and types of challenges in order to provide multifaceted user experiences.
The model of skill acquisition [47, 48], the concept of flow [46] and the framework
of different player types [58] together picture the dynamics and diversity of
individual consumers. Put in simple terms, consumers include different player
types who acquire different skills by different means. Consumers choose these
means according to their desired level of challenge with the goal of maintaining
themselves in the state of flow.
This dynamic is a driving force of engagement within individuals, and has to be
taken into account by gamification-based approaches for sustainable consumption.

Gamification and Sustainable Consumption: Overcoming …

381

Such an approach considers societal, cultural and demographic aspects (e.g.,
regulations, knowledge, restrictions, location of living, number of children, nonavailability of alternatives…) influencing consumers’ decisions. This means that
consumers should not be treated as users to be merely informed, but as social
actors who are engaged in the process of sustainable consumption.

5.2 Requirement 2: Respecting the Consumers’ Autonomy
Respecting the consumers’ autonomy by designing game dynamics that authorize
users to define their own sub-goals and the avenues for reaching their goals (e.g.
according to time, place, action, device, brand).
Direct experience is one important factor in learning, which itself is a powerful
factor in changing behaviors. Developing more sustainable behaviors with regard
to consumption by allowing consumers to design their own routes and choose their
own speed (e.g. by defining sub-goals) instead of following predefined paths and
system structures, thus respecting consumers’ autonomy, is an important part of
gamification-based approaches for sustainable consumption.
This approach enables consumers to obtain experience alongside the core
(offering an indirect path to sustainable consumption) and gives individual meaning
to actions (and to their output). Moreover, consumers are part of the process of
solution building. This is both a powerful motivational element and a bottom-up
approach generating knowledge for the whole field of sustainable consumption.

5.3 Requirement 3: Introducing the Social Level
Enabling social interaction by providing possibilities for (normative) comparisons
of individual achievements and the opportunity to share own experiences and
suggestions with others in order to enable social learning.
Gamification-based approaches to sustainable consumption only make sense when
taken to the social level. By doing so, the isolated view of actions can be expanded
by relating them to the context in which they are carried out.
This overcomes the rational approach of measurable aspects by adding meaning
to specific actions. Normative comparisons expand multifaceted user experiences
by introducing additional game elements, such as competition. Moreover, the
sharing of suggestions and experiences might trigger more solutions and strategies
for sustainable consumption and lead to spillover effects.

382

M.Z. Huber and L.M. Hilty

5.4 Requirement 4: Enabling Collective Action
Enabling group experiences by introducing game elements on a group level in
order to expand user experiences and providing more possibilities for engagement,
particularly intra-group cooperation and inter-group competition.
This requirement differs from requirement 3 by specifically addressing the experience of collective action. By introducing the possibility of collective actions,
gamification-based approaches enable the achievement of group goals. The
combination with requirement 2, e.g. reaching group goals while setting individual
sub-goals, widens the user experience and provides an additional motivational
aspect. Moreover, by taking collective actions, synergetic effects become visual to
individuals. This is relevant because single actions taken by individuals are often
perceived as a drop in the ocean.

6 Conclusion and Future Work
We have discussed limitations of PT we consider relevant in the field of sustainable consumption, particularly
•
•
•
•
•

the focus on measurable effects,
the assumption of rational choice,
an insufficient account of individual differences and social context,
the paradigm of raising awareness and changing attitudes,
the inherent technology paternalism.

Gamification-based solutions have great potential for engaging consumers in
sustainable consumption, but are not per se immune to the limitations of PT. For
this reason, a design framework for gamification-based solutions is needed. Based
on existing evidence from the literature in the fields of PT, eco-feedback technology, game design, psychology and related fields, we defined four basic design
requirements for gamification-based approaches supporting sustainable consumption. The four basic design requirements are:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Respecting consumers as individuals
Respecting the consumers’ autonomy
Introducing the social level
Enabling collective action

These requirements are intended to provide guidance to the designer who wants to
go beyond the limitations of PT. The definition of these basic requirements is a
first stepping-stone toward a design framework for gamification-based approaches
to sustainable consumption.

Gamification and Sustainable Consumption: Overcoming …

383

A complete framework will provide more guidance to the designer in selecting
features depending on the application context, including cultural factors. Empirical
research will be needed to develop aspects of such a design framework by
developing and testing hypotheses about the effects of specific types of gamification on motivation in a sustainability context. The most central issue for a
process that could be called ‘‘motivation design for sustainable consumption’’ is
how to create a link between the physical and social reality. Sustainable consumption is rooted in physical reality, it is about using energy or buying material
goods, while these actions are embedded in existing social practices. Gamification
adds a virtual world that creates a new link between the two spheres and supports
the transformation of practices by using elements of games. Future research based
on empirical studies will help to reveal the success factors of such an approach.

References
1. UNEP: ABC OF SCP: Clarifying concepts on sustainable consumption and production
(2010)
2. Froehlich, J., Dillahunt, T., Klasnja, P.: UbiGreen: investigating a mobile tool for tracking
and supporting green transportation habits. In: Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems—CHI 09, pp. 1043–1052 (2009)
3. Fogg, B.: Creating persuasive technologies: an eight-step design process. In: Persuasive
(2009)
4. Foster, D., Lawson, S., Blythe, M., Cairns, P.: Wattsup?: Motivating reductions in domestic
energy consumption using social networks. In: Proceedings of the 6th Nordic Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction Extending Boundaries—NordiCHI ’10, pp. 178–187. ACM
Press, New York, NY, USA (2010)
5. Mankoff, J., Fussell, S.R., Dillahunt, T., Glaves, R., Grevet, C., Johnson, M., Matthews, D.,
Matthews, H.S., Mcguire, R., Thompson, R., Shick, A., Setlock, L.: StepGreen.org:
Increasing energy saving behaviors via social networks, pp. 1–8 (2009)
6. Brynjarsdottir, H., Håkansson, M.: Sustainably unpersuaded: how persuasion narrows our
vision of sustainability. In: CHI 2012, pp. 947–956 (2012)
7. Bogost, I.: Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames. MIT Press, Cambridge
(2007)
8. Simões, J., Redondo, R.D., Vilas, A.F.: A social gamification framework for a K-6 learning
platform. Comput. Hum. Behav. 29, 1–9 (2012)
9. LinkedIn. https://www.linkedin.com/
10. ResearchGate. https://www.researchgate.net
11. OPOWER: Better information, motivation, and control for all. http://opower.com/
12. Fogg, B.: Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We Think and Do.
Morgan Kaufmann, Amsterdam (2003)
13. Fogg, B.: Persuasive computers: perspectives and research directions. In: SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing, pp. 225–232 (1998)
14. Spahn, A.: And lead us (not) into persuasion…? Persuasive technology and the ethics of
communication. Sci. Eng. Ethics 18, 633–650 (2012)
15. Froehlich, J., Findlater, L., Landay, J.: The Design of Eco-Feedback Technology. In:
Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
CHI 10, pp. 1999–2008. ACM Press (2010)

