Green Communications: An Emerging
Challenge for Mobile Broadband
Communication Networks
E. Calvanese Strinati, A. De Domenico and L. Herault
CEA, LETI, MINATEC, 38000 Grenoble, France;
e-mail: {emilio.calvanese-strinati, antonio.de-domenico, laurent.herault}@cea.fr
Received: 7 February 2011; Accepted: 20 March 2011

Abstract
Worldwide mobile broadband communications networks are increasingly
contributing to global energy consumption. In this paper we tackle the important issue of enhancing the energy efficiency of cellular networks without
compromising coverage and users perceived Quality of Service (QoS). The
motivation is twofold. First, operators need to reduce their operational energy
bill. Second, there is a request of environmental protection from governments
and customers to reduce CO2 emissions due to information and communications technology. To this end, in this paper we first present the holistic system
view design adopted in EARTH (Energy Aware Radio and neTworking tecHnologies) project. The goal is to ensure that any proposed solution to improve
energy efficiency does not degrade the energy efficiency or performance on
any other part of the system. Then, we focus on technical solutions related to
resource allocation strategies designed for increasing diversity order, robustness and effectiveness of a wireless multi-user communication system. We
investigate both standalone and heterogeneous cells deployment scenarios. In
standalone cells deployment scenarios, the challenge is to reduce the overall
downlink energy consumption while adapting the target of spectral efficiency
to the actual load of the system and meeting the QoS. Then, with heterogeneous deployment scenarios, different cell scales that ranges from macro to

Journal of Green Engineering, 267–301.
c 2011 River Publishers. All rights reserved.


268

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

micro, pico and even femto cells, potentially may share the same spectrum in
a given geographical area. In such scenarios interference is the most limiting
problem to achieve the desired performance. Our analysis reveals how proposed methodologies permit to achieve notable energy gain over traditional
resource allocation techniques especially in not saturated scenarios.
Keywords: EARTH, green communications, energy efficiency, femtocells,
interference, radio resource management.

1 Introduction
Telecommunication has experienced a tremendous success causing proliferation and demand for ubiquitous heterogeneous broadband mobile wireless
communications. Up to now, innovation aimed at improving wireless networks coverage and capacity while meeting the QoS requested by users
admitted to the system. Nowadays, the number of mobile subscribers equals
more than half the global population. Forecast on telecommunication market
assumes an increase in subscribers, per subscriber’s data rate, and the roll
out of additional base stations for next generation mobile networks. An undesired consequence is the growth of wireless network’s energy consumption
that will cause an increase of the global carbon dioxide (CO2 ) emissions,
and impose more and more challenging operational cost for operators. Communication Energy Efficiency (EE) presents indeed an alarming bottleneck
in the telecommunication growth paradigm. Motivated by this scenario, we
outline the main investigation axes that may significantly improve the EE of
broadband cellular networks, thereby reducing the cost and environmental
impact of mobile broadband services. Today’s mobile networks have a strong
potential for energy savings. The design of mobile networks has until now
been focused on reducing the energy consumption of terminals, whose battery
power imposes stringent requirements on energy consumption. This has led to
a situation where terminal energy consumption is only a fraction of the energy
consumption of the mobile network. For example, NTT DOCOMO [1] has
calculated that, for their 52 million subscribers in 2006, the energy consumption of their network per mobile user per day was 120 times greater than the
daily energy consumption of a typical user’s mobile phone. The increase in
energy consumption of NTT DOCOMO’s network over the years from 2002
to 2006 is shown to be directly related to the increase in number of base
stations installed. Consequently, the optimization of energy-consumption of
radio base stations should have a large impact on the overall EE of the net-

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

269

work. As a matter of fact, recent increasing maturity of mobile technology in
combination with the growing amount of equipment deployed each year have
woken up the need to innovate in the field of energy efficient communications.
Three main federative projects that face the challenge of enhancing the EE in
mobile wireless broadband networks are: the core 5 Green Radio programme
of mobile Virtual Center of Excellence (MVCE) [2, 3], GreenTouch [4], and
EARTH [5, 6].
Energy efficient enhancement in wireless communication can be achieved
only if improvements are experienced in the whole communication chain for
different operational load scenarios. Several investigations are carried out in
this research area, ranging from energy efficient cooling of base stations to innovative energy efficient deployment strategies, and frequency planning. The
EARTH project sets a very innovative challenge: development of an holistic
methodology to characterize the energy consumption of cellular networks
including suitable metrics. Today, there exists no widely agreed methodology
to evaluate the energy efficiency of cellular networks. Similarly, meaningful
energy efficiency metrics are currently lacking. Both, in conjunction with reference scenarios, will enable a successful evaluation of the energy efficiency
of networks. Such agreed methodology will be the enabler of a fair comparison of different concepts and technologies. EARTH’s holistic methodology
is presented in Section 2.
The objective of this paper is threefold. First, we present in detail the
holistic system view proposed in the EARTH project, which may allow us
to ensure that any proposed radio EE improvement does not degrade EE or
performance on the terminal side or any other part of the system. To this end,
in Section 2 we present and comment on a unified approach to improve the EE
of the whole communication system. We focus on how energy consumption
of mobile broadband networks may be significantly reduced in representative
traffic scenarios. We consider LTE like systems which face a very challenging
multi-user communication problem: many users in the same geographic area
require high on-demand data rates in a finite bandwidth with a variety of
heterogeneous services such as voice (VoIP), video, gaming, web browsing
and others. We will present a holistic optimization methodology that includes
socio-economic impact of broadband communication, definition of reference
scenarios, and targets and evaluation metrics.
Second, we present and benchmark the EE effectiveness of a novel energy efficient Radio Resource Management (RRM) algorithm for OFDMA
based systems. Since wireless is a shared medium, the system EE is affected not only by the single user efficiency, but also by the combination

270

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

of time and frequency allocation according to the momentary instances of
the frequency selective channel between the downlink base station and the
receiving user equipments. Hence, in order to achieve EE, a system approach
is required. In our vision, the multi-user scheduler should indeed allocate
time and frequency resources to minimize the transmission energy cost while
meeting QoS requirements of all active users admitted by a base station. The
momentary system load plays an important role in the overall optimization
design. Currently deployed base station are commonly designed so that they
can accommodate the traffic demand at peak times. Nevertheless, cell traffic
load notably varies during the day. Several researches pointed out that to
save energy, base stations should perform a dynamic load and energy state
arrangement, which balances extra load on a determined optimal set of base
stations, thus maintaining minimum energy consumption. In this paper we
do not propose novel dynamic sleep mode of base station components. We
focus on resource allocation of active phases of base stations during downlink transmission. We propose a simple algorithm to trade off momentary
spectral efficiency for downlink transmission power while meeting the QoS
constraints of active users admitted in the cell. To this end, we propose a
scheduling algorithm which splits the resource allocation process into four
steps. In the first step we identify which entities (packets) are rushing and
which are not rushing. Then in step two we deal with urgencies: we assign
resources only to entities that have an high probability of missing their QoS
requirements regardless to their momentary link quality and their potential
to save energy. Then, if any resources (here chunks) are still unscheduled,
in the third step we allocate resources to users (non-rushing) with highest
momentary link quality, regardless to their QoS constraints. In the fourth
step we perform energy efficient link adaptation to save downlink energy. We
trade off throughput (lowering the transmission spectral efficiency and allocating a larger number of chunks to UEs) for downlink power by limiting the
power budget on each chunk. In this way we attempt to minimize downlink
transmission power over a time window, which provides significant additional
flexibility to the scheduling algorithm. In addition to throughput, both latency
and spectral efficiency enter in the tradeoff. In an extreme case of latency
tolerance or low load scenarios, the scheduler could simply wait for the user
to get close to the base station before transmitting or allocate all frequency
resource to a single packet transmission with significant lowered power. We
call the proposed algorithm a Green Adaptive Scheduler (GAS) [7].
Third, we propose an RRM algorithm to improve the EE of a heterogeneous cellular network where macrocells and femtocells [8] share the same

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

271

spectrum in a given geographical area. In such heterogeneous deployment
scenario, interference is the most limiting problem to achieve the desired performance, in terms of both spectral efficiency and energy efficiency. Macro
users (M-UEs) close to femtocells experience femto-to-macro interference
that may drastically corrupt the reliability of communications. Similarly,
neighbour femtocells belonging to the same operators may also interfere with
each other, thus creating femto-to-femto interference.
Recent economical investigations claim that femtocell deployment might
reduce both the Operational Expenditure (OPEX) and Capital Expenditure
(CAPEX) for cellular operators (see, for instance, [9]). A recent study [10]
shows that expenses scale from $60000/year per macrocell to $200/year per
femtocell. However, according the ABI Research [11, 12], by the end of 2012
more than 36 million of femtocells are expected to be sold worldwide with
150 million of customers. Thus, interdependence between energy efficiency,
service constraints and deployment efficiency are not straight forward. Recently some researchers have faced these challenges. In [13], the authors carry
out an energy efficiency comparison between different size cells. In [14],
a theoretical study that describes the effectiveness of NodeB deployment
and the system energy efficiency is presented. In [15], the authors present
an energy saving procedure that allows femtocell Base Station (also named
FAP or HeNB) to completely switch off its radio transmissions and associated
processing when not involved in active calls. In [16], the authors cope with the
problem of interference proposing a time division duplexing underlay scheme
in which femtocells reuse the uplink macrocell bandwidth. In [17], an RRM
algorithm that trades off frequency resource for energy is proposed to reduce
the interference perceived at both macro and femto users. In [18], we come
out with the design of a simple and effective RRM algorithm (RRM Ghost ),
which permits to drastically improve the overall network performance. The
proposed algorithm efficiently profit of the unusual communication context
of femtocells for which locally few UEs compete for a large amount of transmission resource. In this paper, we investigate the system energy efficiency
obtained if the RRMGhost algorithm is implemented at femtocells. A detailed
description of the algorithm and numerical results are presented in Section 7

272

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

Figure 1 Green networks innovation axes.

2 Holistic EE Optimization Methodology for a Broadband
Cellular Network
A unified approach to improve the EE of the whole communication system
is still missing. Nevertheless, the potential offered by joint optimizations is
in our vision the most promising one. Joint optimizations are represented by
cross layer optimizations that take component and node architectures as well
as radio interface technologies and network architecture into account. We
present here the holistic optimization methodology proposed in the EARTH
project that is composed of three major investigation axes:
• EE Optimization Methodology Framework
• EE Design of Green Networks
• EE Design of Green Radios
These three investigation axes will be the background knowledge for the
design of new green network architecture. Figure 1 summarizes the concepts
that should be investigated at network level.

3 Definition of an EE Optimization Methodology
Framework
Today running broadband cellular networks have been designed to maximize
coverage areas and spectral efficiency of communication systems. In such
networks EE optimization has not yet played a prime role. Hence, metrics
like spectral efficiency, capacity or throughput have been used to characterize usefulness and differences of investigated solutions. Nevertheless, these
metrics are not sufficient to judge the EE of a communication system. A fun-

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

273

Figure 2 Framework to enhance the EE of broadband cellular networks.

damental analysis of key radio technologies in terms of their EE is lacking.
This is partly due to the fact that there are neither suitable methodologies
nor metrics established to enable a fair and objective comparison of these
techniques. Thus, an important prerequisite for efforts to enhance the EE of
cellular networks is to provide a framework to evaluate these technologies. In
Figure 2 we summarize the proposed working framework.
First, the socio-economic impact of broadband communication system
permits to define and forecast targets of energy efficient optimization. Then,
the definition of reference scenarios characterizes the specific framework
for which some specific EE enhancements are envisioned. Eventually, to
evaluate the effectiveness of the EE optimization, targets and evaluation
metrics are defined. Today there is not common view on such EE metrics in the wireless community and, a wide range of metrics are used by
vendors operators and academia. Since 2009, standardization of energy efficiency metrics has started. One of the major bodies of standardization that
is working on the topic is the ETSI Technical Committee on Environmental
Engineering (ETSI-TC-EE) [19]. ETSI-TC-EE has started working on the
specification of energy efficiency metrics for mobile cellular networks. Up to
now, ETSI-TC-EE focuses only on EE metric specifications at component

274

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

level. Furthermore, criteria related to the quality-of-service are neglected.
Nevertheless, to achieve the goal of a holistic network design, EE metrics
should also take the following into account:
• The input power required to generate a specific output power at the
antennas.
• Energy consumed by digital signal processing equipment (interference
cancelation techniques, complex decoding, etc.). With this type of metrics, the tradeoff between EE improvement of specific signal processing
algorithms and their consumed energy can be understood.
• Specific metrics on EE of RRM schemes and their related control signalling cost. These types of metrics are worth when the EE analysis
of the system considers not only the single-user optimization problem
but also the multi-user case. With such a type of metrics we can understand the tradeoff between EE improvement due to multi-user RRM
algorithms (such as frequency and packet scheduling, power allocation
and power control, etc.) and additional control signalling cost.
• The energy to deliver data to the base station (backhaul power consumption).
The subject of EE metrics is presented more extensively in [20]. The EARTH
European project is providing an extensive overview on this topic.

4 Design of Green Networks
Until now, several Radio Access Technologies (RATs) have been deployed
in a parallel way, accommodating different service requirements over the
same area and providing multi-RAT handovers. Nevertheless, such solutions
have stand-alone network planning and resource management methodologies.
In our method, the common network design goal has been to optimize the
system’s capacity and coverage while meeting QoS requirements of different types of applications in very different communication scenarios, ranging
from large macro to femto cells for different environmental characteristics.
Solutions have been optimized for the high load system operating point.
Nevertheless, systems are most of the time offloaded. Very recently efforts
are originated for joint management of the multi-RAT technologies focusing on common capacity and coverage optimization [21]. These previous
efforts did not include EE considerations and not necessarily resulted in
optimal deployment or performance from an energy consumption point of
view. Moreover, cellular networks exhibit slowly changing daily load patterns

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

275

as well as highly dynamic traffic fluctuations. However, currently networks
are configured rather statically. Since most of the energy wastage occurs
during low load situations, these load variations can be effectively exploited
to reduce network energy consumption. Therefore, dynamic load variations
should be addressed by energy efficient RRM strategies. Innovative design of
green networks would require to innovate in the following three topics:
• Network Deployment.
• Network Management.
• Radio Resource Management.
4.1 Network Deployment
While a lot of work has been performed on developing throughput, capacity or coverage enhancing concepts for cellular networks, little insights
have been gained which techniques can be applied to improve the energy
efficiency resulting in less optimal strategies for overall network energy
consumption. Moreover, recently the heterogeneous radio access networks
(HetNets) concept is under investigation by both academics and industry.
The HetNet deployment proposes a flexible and open architecture for a large
variety of wireless access technologies, applications and services with different QoS demands as well as different protocol stacks. Wireless networks
differ from each other by air interface technology, cell-size, services, price,
access, coverage and ownership. The complementary characteristics offered
by the different RATs make possible to exploit the deployment diversity gain
leading to higher overall performance than the aggregated performances of
the standalone networks. Actually, the biggest advantages of a heterogeneous
network are the significant gains in network capacity and coverage via aggressive spatial spectrum reuse of available bands. This gain can be exploited
to drastically reduce the overall energy consumption of the network. To this
end, it is first fundamental to determine the theoretical and practical limitations on energy efficiency of HetNets deployment scenarios. The goal is to
understand how to reduce system energy consumption based on deployment
strategies using different cell sizes, network topologies, coordination between
radio access technologies and investigates network deployments including
macro base stations, femto cells, relays and repeaters that share the same
spectrum in the same geographical area. Then, the second challenge will be
to define how to reduce overall system energy consumption by combining
and coordinating different sites and radio technologies. This is the object of
EE RRM techniques. Eventually, there is the challenge of designing meth-

276

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

odologies for energy efficient radio network deployments including femto
cells, relays, repeaters, distributed antennas, etc. Indeed, an energy efficient
network deployment can be design by defining the optimal mix of cell size,
share of the common spectrum and, the set of adaptive resource allocation
methods that may drive to large EE gains.
4.2 Network Management
In our vision, innovative network management concepts will lead to large
network’s energy consumption savings. The challenge is to understand how
to tune the radio network nodes in order to achieve gains from coordination
between different functions and nodes in the radio network, including the
backbone network. The studied mechanisms should enable self EE optimization of the network, requiring only minimal human intervention. The concept
is that the system autonomously and dynamically changes the cellular layout
of the mobile network according to, e.g., the daily traffic profile.
To this end, the design of novel EE network management functions
requires to investigate theoretical limits of energy efficient network management algorithms. Then, it is required to understand how overall system
energy consumption can be reduced through proper configuration and tuning
of radio network nodes, including interaction and cooperation between network elements (including radio, transport and backbone network elements).
Furthermore, network management methods for EE multi-RAT coordination
should be investigated.
4.3 Energy Efficient RRM
RRM algorithms have been designed to maximize the system capacity while
overcoming the mismatch between requested QoS and limited network resources under full system load. However, system load in mobile systems is
dynamic in nature and, traditional RRM schemes are not necessarily efficient
at different operating conditions. Novel RRM schemes developed, in addition
to load variation, should take into account the characteristics of RF front-end
such as Power Amplifiers (PA) as well as uplink and downlink power and
bandwidth constraints. This is further enhanced by the development of RRM
schemes considering multi-cell cooperation for power control and scheduling
transmissions. Moreover, schedulers could attempt to minimize the energy
required per correctly delivered information bits, while meeting the QoS
of admitted heterogeneous active users. Information theorists have studied

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

277

energy-efficient transmission for at least two decades [22, 23]. More recently,
several researchers have designed solutions to trade spectral and energy efficiency. Single user EE optimization is a vivid investigation topic. In [24] the
authors propose to trade off energy for transmission delay. Actually, Shannon
theory indicates that it is desirable to transmit a packet over a longer period of
time to save transmit energy. The authors consider a single user scenario with
single type homogeneous traffic and, propose to scale the modulation down to
conserve energy when its buffer is under loaded. When the buffer starts to fill
up, the modulation order is increased to avoid long queuing times or buffer
overflow. This proposal assumes that power consumption monotonically increases when transmission power increases. Under this assumption, as far as
single user QoS constraints are met, power can be minimized by reducing the
information rate at the expense of delay. Actually, as wireless is a shared medium, the overall system EE is affected not only by the single user efficiency,
but also by the combination of time and frequency allocation according to the
momentary instances of the frequency selective channel between the downlink base station and the receiving selected user equipments. Hence, in order
to achieve EE, a system approach is required. In our vision, RRM methods
such as the multi-user scheduler should indeed allocate time and frequency
resources to minimize the transmission energy cost while meeting QoS requirements of all active users admitted by a base station. Up to now this is
not the current optimization target. Traditional packet scheduling algorithms
are designed to increase the maximum system capacity, subject to QoS constraints and fairness. Nevertheless, most of the time, wireless systems are
only moderately loaded. With state of the art priority scheduling algorithms,
the exploitation of available time and frequency resources is typically not
optimized from an energy perspective.
Earliest Deadline First (EDF) [25] schedulers do not profit much from
time diversity as much as they should do. Maximum Channel to Interference
ratio (MCI) [26] schedulers aim at maximizing the cell throughput regardless of the user QoS and the actual system load, and consequently they are
totally insensitive to any time constraints of the data traffic. In not saturated system load scenarios, the exploitation of available time and frequency
resources is typically not optimized from a energy perspective. Several researches pointed out that to save energy, base stations should perform a
dynamic load and energy state arrangement, which balances extra load on
a determined optimal set of base stations, thus maintaining minimum energy
consumption. In [7] a simple algorithm is presented to trade off momentary
spectral efficiency for downlink transmission power while meeting the QoS

278

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

constraints of active users admitted in the cell. The authors propose a novel
scheduler, the GAS This is one example of what we can do if we change the
optimization paradigm from optimization of spectral efficiency to a balanced
tradeoff between energy efficiency and spectral efficiency. Moreover, in case
of a multi-user scenario, power consumption of base station can be rateindependent if the system is not heavily loaded. Actually, information rate
depends on transmission power but also on the momentary link quality on
frequency resources allocated to scheduled users. In [27], it is recalled that
the lowest order modulation should always be used while accommodating the
delay constraint to minimize energy consumption.
Concluding, EE for RRM algorithms is a vivid research area. Nevertheless there is still a large room for improvement. In our vision it is required to
the theoretical limits of energy efficient Radio Resource Management (RRM)
algorithms and identification of their main parameters. The fundamental EE
versus spectral efficiency tradeoff has not been solved yet. Furthermore, with
the introduction of HetNets, an additional dimension to the tradeoff has to be
considered: deployment efficiency. Finally, it is necessary to understand how
highly dynamic RRM principles can reduce overall system energy consumption in practical systems where signalling overhead can drive to significant
EE gain limitations.

5 Design of Green Radios
Additionally, novel technologies and components, as well as energy efficient
radio interface techniques must be holistically investigated. Innovative design
of green radios would require innovation of the following three topics:
• Reduction of dissipated power of base station hardware components.
• Design of link interfaces and application of innovative radio transmission techniques.
• Energy efficient RRM.
Figure 3 summarizes the concepts that we propose to investigate at node and
single cell levels.
5.1 Reduction of Dissipated Power of Base Station Hardware
Components
In a green network, depending on the coverage range and momentary utilization ratio of base stations, different peak output power levels will be

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

279

Figure 3 Green radios innovation axes.

required. State of the art Power Amplifier (PA) do not full fill these requirements. Currently available solutions are optimized regarding the power
efficiency in maximum load scenarios. However, the maximum load scenario
is a rather rare case in typical network deployments of operators. That means
that most of the time, the network infrastructure is operated with sub-optimal
EE thus leading to a significant waste of energy resources. Therefore, power
efficiency of base stations components has significant further improvement
potential. Radical new approaches should be envisaged to realize fundamental efficiency improvement. To this end, new configurations of PA should
be investigated. Actually, PA should be able to tune the output power for
different operating conditions in real time. For instance, power variations at
the output of the PA cause impedance variations resulting in antenna mismatch and thereby in power wastage of the overall system. In our vision, joint
optimization of PA and antenna networks should be introduced to achieve
reconfigurable/tuneable interstate matching networks. Moreover, transceivers
should support the scaling of the consumed energy in order to enable the
adaptation of energy consumption to actual performance requirements. Such
energy scalability [28] should be present in all components (analogue RF
front-end, baseband) and in all devices. Furthermore, transceivers should en-

280

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

able dynamic power management in order to keep active only their necessary
modules during sleep modes. Indeed, at component level, a key investigation axe is the design of traffic load adaptive base station components, with
harmonized solutions for EE control on system level and energy efficient
base station components unlocking solutions for EE operation of cellular
networks.
5.2 Design of Link Interfaces and Application of Innovative
Radio Transmission Techniques
State of the art radio link designs (such as beam forming, MIMO, adaptive
antennas arrays, coordinated multi-point transmission and, advanced retransmission schemes) have been designed to achieve high peak data rates, good
coverage and low latencies. As consequence, mobile terminals require to
operate periodic control messages and reference signals from base stations.
This limits the possibilities for base station sleep intervals in low load scenarios. Consequently, a significant amount of energy today is wasted by not
having appropriate base station sleep mechanisms in place. Some researchers
have started proposing solutions on isolated aspects and mainly non-cellular
systems [29–32]. A similar embracing analysis of the EE of radio link technologies for cellular is lacking, despite cellular systems represent the major
energy consumers due their universal proliferation. In particular, the aspects
of the radio link operation in low load scenarios have not been addressed
so far. In order to progress the state of the art on energy efficient radio link
technologies, several investigation axes should be explored. First, innovation
should achieve joint optimization of energy efficient radio link operation
strategies for all load regimes. Second, the specific case of low load and
short range coverage such as in femto cells deployment should be extensively
investigated.

6 Green Adaptive Scheduling for OFDMA Based Systems
Traditional packet scheduling algorithms are designed to increase the
maximum system capacity, subject to QoS constraints and fairness.
Nevertheless, most of the time, wireless systems are only moderately
loaded. With state of the art priority scheduling algorithms, the exploitation
of available time and frequency resources is typically not optimized
from an energy perspective. The goal of our investigation is to design an
energy efficient scheduling algorithms which meets the QoS constraint

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

281

of an heterogeneous population of UEs. In system load scenarios that are
not saturated, the exploitation of available time and frequency resources
is typically not optimized from an energy perspective. Based on these
observations, we propose to split the resource allocation process into four
steps:
Step 1: The Rushing Entity Classifier (REC) classifies entities (packets of
UEs) waiting to be scheduled as rushing or non-rushing.
With real-time (RT) traffic, packets are classified as rushing if T hrush ·
TTL + η ≥ RTTL , where T hrush is a threshold on the QoS deadline that depends on the traffic type, TTL is the time to live of the packet, η is a constant
which takes into account both retransmission interval and maximum allowed
number of retransmissions, and RTTL is the remaining TTL.
With non-real-time (NRT) traffic, flows and not packets are classified by
the REC. Therefore, the ith user equipment (U Ei ) is classified as rushing
if one of its NRT flows has been under-served during T Wi . More precisely,
every Transmission Time Interval (TTI) the REC checks for each U Ei if
(T Wi − tnow,i ) ≤ (QoSi − txdata,i)/Rmin , where tnow,i is the elapsed time
since the beginning of T Wi , QoSi the QoS requirements of the UE class of
traffic, txdata,i the total data transmitted by user i during (T Wi − tnow,i ) and
Rmin the minimum active transmission rate of the system (always larger than
zero). Note that T hrush, η and T Wi are scheduler design parameters.
Step 2: Resources (chunks) are allocated to rushing entities with an EDF-like
scheduler which allocates best chunk(s) to entities with higher deadline
priority. Deadline priority metrics differ between RT and NRT traffics:
while with RT traffic deadline priority depends on RTTL , with NRT traffic it
depends on the under served data rate experienced by U Ei during T Wi .
Step 3: All unscheduled resources (chunks) are assigned to users which
maximize spectral efficiency, regardless to any QoS constraints. Priority
is granted indeed to UEs selected by standard MCI ‘matrix-based chunk
allocation’ described in [33]. Actually, the matrix contains the metrics
λk,n (i) of all possible user-chunk pairs (only for previously unscheduled
chunks), where at time i, UE k has a metric for chunk n which is given
by λk,n (i) = Rk,n (i). Rk,n (i) is the instantaneous supportable rate for
UE k at chunk n, depending on each UE’s Channel Quality Indicator
(CQI). At each time i, given an unscheduled chunk n, the scheduled UE
is Un (i) = argmaxk λk,n (i). Indeed, the Adaptive Modulation and Coding

282

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

(AMC) algorithm suggests for each U Ek assigned to chunk n the most
spectral efficient Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS), MCS∗k,n , which
meets PERtarget .
Step 4: We trade off UE’s throughput for downlink power by limiting the
power budget on each non-rushing allocated chunk. Therefore, in order to
meet the QoS constraints while lowering the transmission power budget,
a lower MCS order has to be selected for transmission. Two solutions are
possible. Either power is lowered to a given low power level, or a target low
power MCS is fixed: MCSlow−power . Such MCSlow−power can be for instance
suggested by the admission control based on the actual traffic load of the cell.
Then, for each U Ek assigned to chunk n, the scheduler scales down MCS∗k,n
to low power MCS (MCSlow−power ) only if MCS∗k,n > MCSlow−power . Downlink transmission power is indeed reduced for chunks allocated to non-urgent
UEs.
6.1 Simulation Results
In this section we assess the effectiveness of our proposed GAS algorithm
(see Section 6) comparing it with two scheduling algorithms often investigated in the literature: MCI, and EDF. Schedulers are compared in different
traffic load scenarios in terms of the following power efficiency metric i :
KiUE
i =

j =1

RB
Ni,j
· Pi,j

KiUE
j =1

(1)

ρi,j

RB
where at TTI i, KiU E , Ni,j
, Pi,j and ρi,j are respectively the number of active
UEs in the cell, the number of chunk allocated to user j , the downlink power
for transmission on each chunk and the throughput of user j .
Schedulers are compared in three traffic scenarios:

• Scenario A (single real-time traffic): unique VoIP [34] or NRTV [35]
traffic type in the cell for all UEs.
• Scenario B (mixed real-time traffic): coexistence of VoIP and NRTV
traffic in the same cell.
• Scenario C (heterogeneous mixed traffic): coexistence of VoIP and
HTTP [35] traffic in the same cell.
Simulation results are given for the system and traffic models summarized
in Table 1. Note that we simulate the traffic of the central cell, while others

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

283

Table 1 Main system model parameters.
Network
Parameter
Value
Carrier frequency
2.0 GHz
Bandwidth
10 MHz
Inter-site distance
500 m
Minimum distance
35 m
TTI duration
1 ms
Cell layout
Hexagonal grid, 19 three-sectored cells
Link to System interface
EESM
Traffic model
VoIP, NRTV
Nb of antennas (Tx, Rx)
(1,1)
Access Technique
OFDMA
Total Number of Sub-carriers
600
Nb of Sub-carriers per PRB
12
Total Nb of Chunks (PRB)
50
Propagation Channel
Fast fading
Typical urban 6-tap model, 3 km/h
Interference
White
UE
Channel estimation
ideal
Turbo decoder
max Log-MAP (8 iterations)
Dynamic Resource Allocation
Nb of MCS
12 (from QPSK 1/3 to 64-QAM 3/4)
10 %
AMC PERtarget
CQI report
Each TTI, with 2 ms delay
Packet Scheduling
EDF, MCI, and GAS
Sub-carriers Allocation Strategy Chunk based allocation

BSs are used for down-link interference generation only. Results are averaged
over 100 independent dynamic runs, where at the beginning of each run UEs
are randomly uniformly located in the central cell. Each run simulates 50
seconds of network activity and at each TTI channel realizations are updated.
We check if QoS is met based on the metrics defined in [34, 36]. Real-time
VoIP and NRTV UEs are satisfied if more than 95% of the UEs have a residual Packet Error Rate (PER) below 2% and their TTL is respectively 50 and
100 ms.
In Figure 4 we show our simulation results for scenario A with single
VoIP traffic and we consider a number of active UEs in the cell that ranges
between 20 to 540. Three scheduling algorithms are investigated under this
scenario: EDF (dashed curve), MCI (dotted curve) and GAS (solid curve).
Note that 540 satisfied VoIP UEs is the limit with any of the investigated

284

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

schedulers. The highest system load (540 satisfied active UEs) is achieved
with EDF and GAS only. MCI can satisfy up to 450 coexistent active UEs.
Such maximum load gap between EDF and MCI is not surprising. Actually,
since MCI allocates resources to UEs with better momentary link quality
regardless of the user time QoS constraints, with the increasing number of
real-time flows, many users may face momentary service starvation and consequently, exceed the maximum delivery delay (50 msec). This is not the case
with EDF since it allocated best chunk(s) to entities with higher QoS deadline
priority. From an EE point of view, we observe that EDF performs slightly
better than MCI. Actually, UEs served with MCI experience an higher average transmission spectral efficiency. This causes an higher energy loss caused
by the transmission of padding bits added when a UE has not enough data to
entirely fill the allocated chunk(s). Our simulation results show how GAS
algorithm permits to notably improve the energy effectiveness. We observe
that in low load scenarios (20 active UEs), the  reduction is up to 32.5%,
and it decreases as expected for higher number of active UEs, having up to
31, 29, 26 and 21% of energy cost reduction with respectively 50, 100, 200
and 350 (up to 550) active UEs.
In Figures 5 and 6 we show our simulation results for scenario B and
C, respectively when 75 NRTV (or 100 HTTP in Figure 6) UEs are active
and the number of active VoIP UEs ranges between 0 and 250 (or between
0 and 450 in Figure 6). This is a more challenging scenario since the system
is heavily loaded and heterogeneous QoS constraints have to be taken into
account in the scheduling rule. As in Figure 4, we compare  performance of
EDF (dashed curve), MCI (dotted curve) and GAS (solid curve). In case of
Figure 5 while MCI cannot satisfy any additional VoIP UEs when 75 NRTV
UEs are present in the system (therefore only a dot is represented in the figure), EDF and GAS can satisfy respectively up to 220 and 250 additional VoIP
UEs. Simulation results show that comparing EDF and GAS, GAS improves
 performance respectively of 18, 16, and 10.5%, with respectively up to 50,
150 and 200 VoIP active UEs. With 250 VoIP UE only GAS can satisfy all
active UEs since it is more flexible and effective in mixed traffic scenarios.
Finally, in Figure 6 we show our simulation results for scenario C, when
100 HTTP UEs are active and the number of active VoIP UEs ranges between
0 and 450. Again, heterogeneous QoS constraints have to be taken into account in the scheduling rule. With the same trend of results, in Figure 6, while
EDF and MCI perform slightly the same (MCI can serve more VoIP UEs),
best performance is obtained with GAS. We observe with GAS scheduling
a  performance improvements of respectively 30 and 15% with 100, and

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

285

5
4.75
4.5
4.25
4
3.75
Γ [W/Kbit/s]

3.5
3.25
3
2.75
2.5
2.25
2

MCI

1.75

EDF

1.5

GAS

1.25
1

50

100

150

200
250
300
350
Number of Voip UEs

400

450

500

Figure 4 Scenario A (single traffic):  performance evaluation with EDF, MCI and GAS
schedulers varying the load of VoIP UEs.

200 VoIP active UEs. Furthermore, in scenario C GAS is able to serve up
to 450 VoIP, while EDF and MCI can satisfy respectively up to 150 and
250 VoIP UEs. Note that GAS presents some steps in its performance since
increasing the number of active users, a smaller room for modulation scaling
of non-urgent UE is experienced.

7 Ghost Femtocells for Energy Efficient Heterogeneous
Cellular Network
In our view, femtocells should be invisible in terms of interference generated
to neighbour cellular users. Nevertheless, femtocells deployment presents a
very challenging issue: while HeNBs power consumption and interference
range should be small, the coverage range at which UEs can meet their
QoS constraints should be large. Based on this observation, we propose
a novel RRM algorithm designed to strongly lower the HeNBs downlink
transmission power. We come out with the design of an RRM algorithm,
the Ghost Femtocells (RRM Ghost ), which trades off transmission energy for

286

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

4.8
4.7

MCI

4.6

EDF

4.5

GAS

4.4
4.3
4.2
4.1
Γ [W/Kbit/s]

4
3.9
3.8
3.7
3.6
3.5
3.4
3.3
3.2
3.1
3
2.9
2.8

0

25

50

75

100
125
150
Number of VoIP UEs

175

200

225

250

Figure 5 Scenario B (mixed traffic):  performance evaluation with EDF, MCI and GAS
schedulers with 75 NRTV UEs varying the load of VoIP UEs.

frequency resources. The detailed description of the proposed algorithm is as
follows:
Step 1 (Classification of Interferers): H-UEs overhear the Broadcast CHannel
(BCH) and estimate which neighbour HeNBs are currently strong interferers.
A interferer is strong, if its sensed power level is larger than a predefined
threshold.
Step 2 (Feedback to HeNB): H-UE feedbacks to the HeNB its QoS
constraints, the momentary Channel State Indicator (CSI) measurements,
and the cell-IDs of the HeNBs perceived as strong interferers.
Step 3 (Feedback to Control Unit): Each HeNB within the femtocell network
(i.e. the group of femtocells placed in a block of apartments) reports this
information to the Control Unit (CU). For each user i in the network, the CU
stores the set of its neighbours Vi . The elements of this set are the users that
are served by the HeNB of user i (HeNBi ) and the users that are served by
the HeNBs that are indicated as strong interferers by HeNBi .

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

287

5.5

5

4.5

Γ [W/Kbit/s]

4

3.5

3

2.5

MCI
EDF

2

1.5

GAS

0

50

100

150

200
250
Number of Users

300

350

400

450

Figure 6 Scenarios C (mixed traffic):  performance evaluation with EDF, MCI and GAS
schedulers with 100 HTTP UEs varying the load of VoIP UEs.

Step 4 (Computing Scheduling Matrices): According to the CSI measurements and the selected scheduler algorithm, the CU computes scheduling
j
metric λi for every user i on every RB j .
In this paper, the RRMGhost implements a proportional fair based scheduler, that is
K

j
j
λi = SINRi
SINRki ,
(2)
k=1
j

where SINRi represents the instantaneous channel condition of the RB j
K
k
observed at user i and
k=1 SINRi is the sum of SINR of K RBs that
have been already allotted to user i. RRM Ghost uses this metric to build the
Nf
Nk × NRB ], where
scheduling matrices M T x and M Rep of dimension [ k=1
Nf is the number of active HeNBs in the network, Nk is the number of users
served by the femtocell k, and NRB is the number of available RBs. Based on
M T x , the scheduler allocates to each user the minimum number of RBs that
meets QoS and power constraints. Then, the proposed scheduler sorts matrix

288

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

M Rep to allocate to the served users additional available RBs.
Step 5 (Scheduling): The CU selects the minimum number of RBs that meets
QoS and power constraints for each user to be served. It schedules in three
steps:
Step 5-a: The controller selects the best user-available RB pair (i, j ) with the
best metric in M T x .
Step 5-b: For each user-available RB pair (i, j ), the algorithm checks the set

of RBs allotted to user i (R
Bi ) and selects the highest possible Modulation

and Coding Scheme (MCSi ), accordingly. The overall available power at user
i served by the HeNB k is P̂i = P T /Nk , where P T and Nk are the power
budget and the number of users of the HeNB k, respectively. The controller

Bi .
equally splits P̂i in the set R
Step 5-c: Then, the controller estimates the sum of the Mutual Information I
 i.

given by set R
Bi and MCS
• When I = 0, the selected user-RB pair cannot be served in this scheduling period so the values of the i-rows in both M T x and M Rep are set to
zero.
• When I ≥ Rtg , user i is served. The values of the i-row in M T x and
M Rep (i, j ) are set to zero and the values of the i-row in M Rep are updated
according to the scheduler rule (see Eq. (2)). Moreover, M T x (k, j ) and
M Rep (k, j ), where k ∈ Vi , are set to zero.
• If I < Rtg , the user i is not served yet. The values M T x (i, j ) and
M Rep (i, j ) are set to zero and the values of the i-rows in M Rep and
M T x are updated according to the scheduler rule (see Eq. (2)). Moreover,
M T x (k, j ) and M Rep (k, j ), where k ∈ Vi , are set to zero.

Step 6 (MCS Scaling): Given the set of RBs (R
Bi ) allocated each served
∗
user i, the algorithm finds the MCS of the minimum order that meets the
 i , the MCS of user i (MCSi ) is
QoS target. If MCS∗ is different from MCS
∗
set equal to MCS . The goal of this process is twofold. First, it improves the
transmission robustness. Second, it reduces the padding thus improving the
spectral efficiency.
Step 7 (Spreading):
The CU allocates unused RBs to spread the original message and improve

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

289

the transmission robustness. Scheduling is done in three steps:
Step 7-a: The scheduler selects the user-available RB pair (i, j ) that has the
best metric in M Rep .
Step 7-b: For each user-available RB pair (i, j ), the algorithm checks the
Mutual Information I given by the entire set of RBs allocated to user i and
MCSi :
• If I < Rtg , exploit further RBs would cause outage, hence the values of
the row corresponding to user I in M Rep are set to zero.
• When I ≥ Rtg , the original message is spread in the additional RB and
M Rep (i, j ) as well as M Rep (k, j ), where k ∈ Vi , are set to zero.
Moreover the values of the i-row in M Rep are updated according to the
scheduler rule.
Step 7-c: The scheduler process terminates when no more user-RB pairs are
available.
Step 8 (Power Scaling): The algorithm estimates the SINR perceived at each
served user and reduces the allocated transmission power to meet the SINR
threshold given by the target PER and the selected MCS.
Step 9 (Message Reception): Finally, each user collects the information received in each of its allotted RBs and combines these RBs using the chase
combining scheme [37].
7.1 Deployment of Femtocells and System Model
In our analisys, we assume that femtocells are deployed according to the
3GPP grid urban deployment model [38] (see Figure 7). This model represents a single floor building with 10 m × 10 m apartments placed next to each
other in a 5 × 5 grid. The block of apartments belongs to the same region
of a macrocell. Moreover, we assume that six additional M-BSs surround the
central macrocell generating additive interference for both macro and femto
users. Each HeNB can simultaneously serve up to four users. In order to
consider a realistic case in which some apartments do not have femtocells,
we use a system parameter ρd called a deployment ratio that indicates the
percentage of apartments with a femtocell. Furthermore, the 3GPP model

290

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

Figure 7 3GPP femtocell grid urban deployment model.

includes ρa , another parameter called an activation ratio defined as the percentage of active femtocells. If a femtocell is active, it will transmit with a
certain power over data channels. Otherwise, it will transmit over the control
channel.
We use two different models to capture the signal propagation effect based
on the 3GPP specifications [38]:
1. Transmissions from femto and macro users to M-BSs:
PL(dB) = 15.3 + 37.6 log10 d + Low ,
where d is the distance between the transmitter and the receiver (in
meters) and Low is the penetration losses of an outside wall equal to
20 dB.
2. Transmissions from femto and macro users to HeNBs:
PL(dB) = 38.46 + 20 log10 d + 0.7d2D,indoor
+ 18.3n((n+2)/(n+1)−0.46) + q · Liw ,
where d is the distance between the transmitter and the receiver (in
meters), d2D,indoor is the two dimensional separation between the trans-

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks
Table 2 Main system model parameters.
Parameter
Carrier frequency
Carrier bandwidth
Total number of Resource Blocks
Inter-site distance
Access Technique
M-BS Tx power
M-BS antenna gain after cable loss
HeNB maximum Tx power
HeNB antenna gain after cable loss
Shadowing distribution
Shadowing standard deviation in the interfering links
Shadowing standard deviation in the femto/macro user useful link
Autocorrelation distance of shadowing
Fast fading distribution
Thermal noise density

291

Value
2.0 GHz
10.0 MHz
50
500 m
OFDMA
16 dBW
13 dB
–17 dBW
0 dB
Log-normal
8 dB
4/8 dB
50 m
Rayleigh
N0 = −174 dBm/Hz

mitter and the receiver (in meters), n is the number of penetrated floors,
q is the number of walls that separate the user apartments and the transmitting HeNB apartment, Liw is the penetration loss of walls within the
grid of apartments equal to 5 dB. The third term in the above expression
represents the penetration loss due to walls inside an apartment. This
attenuation is modeled as a log-linear value equal to 0.7 dB/m. The
fourth term represents the penetration loss within different floors. In the
single floor building scenario considered, we have d = d2D,indoor and
n = 0.
Table 2 shows key model parameters including shadowing, fast fading, the
macrocell antenna gain, and the transmission power.
7.2 Simulation Results
In this section, we assess the effectiveness of the proposed RRM Ghost by
comparing its performance with a reference algorithm (RRMclassic). The main
differences between these schemes are:
1. In RRM classic, there is no coordination within the femtocell network.
Hence, HeNBs are not aware of the presence and allocation strategy of
neighbour HeNBs.
2. RRM classic aims to maximize the spectral efficiency of femtocells while
minimizing the probability that users that belong to different cells access

292

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

to same RBs. Thus, the RRM classic attempts to limit the number of RBs
allotted to each H-UE.
3. RRM classic algorithm does not implement MCS and Power scaling (Steps
6 and 8 in RRM Ghost algorithm).
We present simulation results for the system model and its parameters presented in Section 7.1. RRM algorithms are compared in terms of the efficiency
metric defined in Section 6.1, Eq. (1).
The results are averaged over 100 independent runs. For each run 103
independent TTIs are simulated and at each TTI channel fading instances
are updated. At the beginning of each run, we randomly place two blocks of
apartments where HeNBs, H-UEs, and M-UEs are randomly deployed. Note
that in the presented simulations, we consider that all deployed HeNBs are
active (ρa = 1) with four H-UEs per HeNB. Moreover, indoor M-UEs are
randomly distributed in the apartments where HeNBs are not deployed.
In our simulations, solid and dashed lines, respectively, correspond to the
performance of RRM classic and RRM Ghost schemes.
Figure 8 shows the H-UEs performance as  versus the power budget P T
at each femtocell. We have set ρd equal to 0.3 and considered four different
traffic scenarios:
Scenario Traf.1: H-UE throughput target Ttg = 300 kbit/s, square marked
curves.
Scenario Traf.2: H-UE throughput target Ttg = 600 kbit/s, circle marked
curves.
Scenario Traf.3: H-UE throughput target Ttg = 1 Mbit/s, star marked curves.
Scenario Traf.4: H-UE throughput target Ttg = 2 Mbit/s, diamond marked
curves.
From Figure 8 we can observe that the proposed RRM Ghost improve the
performance of H-UEs compared to RRM classic in all considered traffic scenarios. For instance, considering a HeNB power budget equal to 10 mW, the
proposed RRM Ghost gain up to 94.5% with respect to RRM classic in Scenario
Traf.1, up to 90% in Scenario Traf.2, up to 85% in Scenario Traf.3, and up
to 75.4% in Scenario Traf.4. Moreover, results outline how the gain increases
in lightly loaded scenarios (Scenario Traf.1 and Scenario Traf.2) where our

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

18

293

RRMclassic−Sc. Traf1
RRM

−Sc. Traf

RRM

−Sc.Traf

classic

16

classic

2

3

RRMclassic−Sc. Traf4

14

RRMGhost−Sc. Traf1
RRMGhost−Sc. Traf2

12

RRM

−Sc. Traf

Γ [mW/Mbit/s]

Ghost

3

RRMGhost−Sc. Traf4

10

8

6

4

2

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

Power budget at each HeNB [mW]

Figure 8 Average  measured at H-UEs as function of power budget at each HeNB in different
traffic scenarios.

algorithms permit to strongly reduce the transmission power by improving
the femtocell energy efficiency. In this cases, our schemes takes advantage
of the lower throughput targets to decrease the downlink transmission power
and spreading over RBs.
Figures 9 and 10 show the improvement in M-UE performance under
RRMGhost . In the co-channel femtocell deployment, indoor M-UE performance is limited by femto-to-macro interference. Some recent research introduced cooperation within M-BSs and HeNBs in order to coordinate the access
to the radio medium and avoid the cross-tier interference [39, 40]. However,
following the 3GPP Release 10 [41], we do not implement this coordination
in our system. Hence, the M-BS scheduler is not aware of the RBs exploited
by the interfering HeNBs. When the M-BS assigns an RB to an indoor user
which is used by a neighbour HeNB, this M-UE can be exposed to a high level

294

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

of interference. We aim to evaluate the effect of this interference on M-UE
when femtocells use the reference RRM classic and the proposed scheme.
In order to compare these algorithms, we have set the M-UE throughput
target equal to 300 kbit/s, the H-UE throughput target equal to 600 kbit/s and
considered three different femtocell deployment scenarios:
Scenario δL : low density – ρd = 0.3, circle-marked curves.
Scenario δM : medium density – ρd = 0.5, triangle-marked curves.
Scenario δH : high density – ρd = 0.8, plus-marked curves.
In Figure 9 we show the indoor M-UE performance as  versus the power
budget P T at each femtocell. Results indicate that RRMGhost permit to limit
the impact of the femto-to-macro interference in all scenarios. For instance,
considering P T equal to 20 mW (20 mW is often indicated by researchers and
industries as the current downlink power target for HeNBs), the proposed
RRMGhost gains up to 10.6, 16.2, and 21.5% with respect to RRMclassic in
Scenarios δL , δM , and δH . In low/medium density scenarios, the probability
that neighbour HeNBs allocate the same RBs at the same time is fairly small
under RRMclassic. Hence, RRMGhost improvements mainly come from steps
6, 7, and 8 of the proposed schemes (MCS scaling, spreading, and power
scaling) that permit to reduce the HeNB downlink power transmission in each
RB. However, in Scenario δH , several neighbour HeNBs may access same
RBs in the same TTI resulting in high peak of interference on some RBs. In
RRMGhost , the CU coordinate the access of neighbouring femtocells to further
limit the overall interference perceived at end-users of both macro and femto
cells.
Figure 10 shows the M-UE performance as a function of distance between
the end-user and the M-BS for different femtocell deployment scenarios and
for P T equal to 20 mW. M-UEs that are located far away from the M-BS
perceive low average SINR due to path loss and interference generated by
surrounding M-BSs. Hence, it is fundamental to limit the femto-to-macro
interference to satisfy these macro users’ QoS constraints. Simulation results
show that the proposed algorithm strongly enhance the performance of MUEs placed at the border of the cell. Furthermore, the observed gain increases
with higher density of femtocells and larger distance between the M-UE and
its M-BS.

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

5.5

295

RRMclassic−Sc.δH
RRM

−Sc.δ

classic

M

RRMGhost−Sc.δH
RRM

5

−Sc.δ

Ghost

M

RRMclassic−Sc.δL

Γ [mW/Kbit/s]

RRMGhost−Sc.δL
4.5

4

3.5

3

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

Power budget at each HeNB [mW]

Figure 9 Average  measured at M-UEs as a function of the power budget at each HeNB in
different traffic scenarios.

In Scenario δL , under RRMclassic, the M-BS needs 5.8 mW/Kbit/s to serve
a M-UE placed at 225 meters far away, while only 4.6 mW/Kbit/s are necessary with the proposed RRM Ghost . In Scenario δM , under RRMclassic, the M-BS
needs 7.7 mW/Kbit/s to serve a M-UE placed at 225 meters far away, while
only 5.5 mW/Kbit/s are necessary with the proposed RRM Ghost . In Scenario
δH , under RRM classic, the M-BS needs 10.9 mW/Kbit/s to serve a M-UE
placed at 225 meters far away, while only 7.1 mW/Kbit/s are necessary with
the proposed RRM Ghost .
This improvements result in higher macrocell coverage and capacity. The
maximum number of indoor M-UEs placed at the border of the cell that can
be served simultaneously is
NM−U E =

T
PM−BS

 · TtgM−U E

,

(3)

296

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

11

10

9

RRMclassic−Sc.δH
RRMclassic−Sc.δM
RRMGhost−Sc.δH
RRMclassic−Sc.δL
RRMGhost−Sc.δM
RRM

Γ [mW/Kbit/s]

8

−Sc.δ

Ghost

L

7

6

5

4

3

2
45

75

105

135

165

195

225

Distance between M−BS and M−UE [m]

Figure 10 Average  measured at M-UEs as a function of the distance between the end-user
and the M-BS.
Table 3 Maximum number of indoor M-UEs placed at the border of the macrocell that can be
contemporary served by an M-BS.
ρd \ RRM algorithm RRMclassic RRMGhost
0.3
19
21
0.5
13
18
0.8
9
14

T
where PM−BS
and TtgM−U E are respectively the M-BS downlink available
power and the M-UE throughput target. Table 3 shows the values of NM−U E
T
under the discussed algorithms and in different deployment scenarios (PM−BS
M−U E
and Ttg
are set equal to 16 dBW and 300 Kbit/s, respectively).

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

297

8 Conclusion
Communication Energy Efficiency (EE) presents indeed an alarming bottleneck in the telecommunication growth paradigm. In this paper, we first
detailed the holistic energy efficient optimization methodology for broadband
cellular networks proposed by the EARTH project. We discussed the new
research activities that are currently investigated in the vivid area of Green
Communications. The topics of energy efficiency metrics, network deployment strategies, network management, and energy efficient radio resource
management have been introduced. Then, we investigated downlink power
effectiveness of two reference scheduling algorithms MCI and EDF, in a systems that implements a realistic OFDMA air interface where no full-queued
traffic and unlimited number of control channel per TTI is assumed. We underlined that while EDF does not profit from multi-user diversity, MCI targets
at maximizing the cell throughput regardless of the user’s QoS constraints
even in low load scenarios for which spectral efficiency can be traded with
energy efficiency. Then, we came up with the definition of a novel scheduler,
the GAS algorithm. We evaluated the effectiveness of the proposed GAS
algorithm comparing it with the above reference schedulers. Our simulations
substantiated how GAS is a highly flexible and effective scheduler for a variety of traffic scenarios and it drives to notable energy cost reductions while
meeting the Quality of Service (QoS) of UEs active admitted in the system. In
the third part of the paper, we presented the RRM Ghost , a novel radio resource
management scheme that efficiently uses the available wireless spectrum in
a two-tier network. In this scenario, a large population of heterogeneous interferers shares the overall cellular bandwidth. The proposed algorithm limits
the undesired effects of interference and allows a drastic reduction of the
downlink energy per information bit required to satisfy the QoS constraints
of both macro and femto users.
We expect that both the holistic system methodology and the proposed
energy efficient resource allocation algorithms presented in this paper will
encourage the research community to investigate into innovative solutions in
order to achieve a sustainable increase of broadband communication system.

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the contribution of the EARTH consortium to the technical definition of the project. The work leading to this paper

298

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

has received funding from the European Community’s Seventh Framework
Programme [FP7/2007-2013] under Grant No. 247733 project EARTH.

References
[1] M. Etoh, T. Ohya, and Y. Nakayama. Energy consumption issues on mobile network systems. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Applications and the Internet,
SAINT 2008, pp. 365–368, July–August 2008.
[2] S. Fletcher. Green radio-sustainable wireless networks. Mobile VCE Core, 5, February
2009. Online: http://www.mobilevce.com/dloadspubl/mtg284Item1503.ppt.
[3] Mobile VCE, http://www.mobilevce.com/.
[4] GreenTouch, http://www.greentouch.org/.
[5] M. Gruber, O. Blume, D. Ferling, D. Zeller, M.A. Imran, and E. Calvanese Strinati.
EARTH – Energy Aware Radio and Network Technologies. In Proceedings of IEEE
20th International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications
(PIMRC 2009), pp. 1–5, 2009.
[6] Energy Aware Radio and neTworking tecHnologies European Community’s Seventh
Framework Programme, https://www.ict-earth.eu/.
[7] E. Calvanese Strinati and P. Greco. Green resource allocation for ofdma wireless cellular
networks. In Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and
Mobile Radio Communications, Instanbul, Turkey, September 2010.
[8] V. Chandrasekhar, J. Andrews, and A. Gatherer. Femtocell networks: A survey. IEEE
Communications Magazine, 46(9):59–67, September 2008.
[9] Airvana Inc. How femtocells change the economics of mobile service delivery,
http://www.airvana.com/.
[10] M. Heath et al. Picocells and femtocells: Will indoor base stations transform the telecoms
industry? http://research.analysys.com, 2007.
[11] S. Carlaw. IPR and the potential effect on femtocell markets. FemtoCells Europe,
ABIresearch, 2008.
[12] S. Carlaw and C. Wheelock. Femtocell market challenges and opportunities. ABI
Research, Research Report, Vol. 23, 2007.
[13] B. Badic, T. O’Farrrell, P. Loskot, and J. He. Energy efficient radio access architectures
for green radio: Large versus small cell size deployment. In Proceedings of IEEE 70th
Vehicular Technology Conference Fall (VTC 2009-Fall), pp. 1–5, 2009.
[14] Y. Chen, S. Zhang, and S. Xu. Characterizing energy efficiency and deployment efficiency relations for green architecture design. In Proceedings of IEEE International
Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC 2010), pp. 1–5, 2010.
[15] I. Ashraf, L.T.W. Ho, and H. Claussen. Improving energy efficiency of femtocell base
stations via user activity detection. In Proceedings of IEEE Wireless Communications
and Networking Conference (WCNC 2010), pp. 1–5, 2010.
[16] C.H.M. de Lima, M. Bennis, K. Ghaboosi, and M. Latvaaho. Interference management
for self-organized femtocells towards green networks. In Proceedings of IEEE 21st International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications Workshops
(PIMRC2010), pp. 352–356, 2010.

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

299

[17] A. De Domenico and E. Calvanese Strinati. A radio resource management scheduling algorithm for selforganizing femtocells. In Proceedings of IEEE 21st International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications Workshops
(PIMRC2010), pp. 191–196, 2010.
[18] Emilio Calvanese Strinati, Antonio De Domenico, and Andrzej Duda. Ghost femtocells:
A novel radio resource management scheme for OFDMA based networks. In Proceedings of IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC 2011),
Cancun, Mexico, March 2011.
[19] B. Gorjni. ETSI work programme on energy saving. In Proceedings of 29th International
Telecommunications Energy Conference (INTELEC2007), pp. 174–181.
[20] G. Auer, I. Gódor, L. Hvizi, M.A. Imran, J. Malmodin, P. Fazekas, G. Biczók, H.
Holtkamp, D. Zeller, O. Blume, and R. Tafazolli. Enablers for energy efficient wireless
networks. In Proceedings of IEEE 72nd Vehicular Technology Conference Fall (VTC
2010-Fall), pp. 1–5, 2010.
[21] Ambient Networks, EU FP6 IP, phase 1 2004–2005, phase 2 2006–2007,
http://www.ambientnetworks.org/.
[22] R.G. Gallager. Power limited channels: Coding, multiaccess, and spread spectrum. In
Proceedings of 1988 Conference Information Sciences and Systems, March 1988.
[23] S. Verdu. On channel capacity per unit cost. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
36(5):1019–1030, 1990.
[24] C. Schurgers, O. Aberthorne, and M.B. Srivastava. Modulation scaling for energy aware
communication systems. In Proceedings of International Symposium on Low Power
Electronics and Design, 2001.
[25] F.M. Chiussi and V. Sivaraman. Achieving high utilization in guaranteed services
networks using early deadline-first scheduling. In Proceedings of Sixth International
Workshop on Quality of Service (IWQoS1998), pp. 209–217, May 1998.
[26] A. Pokhariyal, T.E. Kolding, and P.E. Mogensen. Performance of downlink frequency
domain packet scheduling for the UTRAN long term evolution. In Proceedings of IEEE
17th International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications
(PIMRC2006), pp. 1–5, 2006.
[27] F. Meshkati, H.V. Poor, S.C. Schwartz, and N.B. Mandayam, An energy-efficient
approach to power control and receiver design in wireless data networks. IEEE Transactions on Communications, 53(11):1885–1894, 2005.
[28] L. Benini, A. Bogliolo, and G. De Micheli. A survey of design techniques for systemlevel dynamic power management. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration
(VLSI) Systems, 8(3):299–316, 2000.
[29] Jui-Hung Yeh, Jyh-Cheng Chen, and Chi-Chen Lee, Comparative analysis of energysaving techniques in 3GPP and 3GPP2 systems. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, 58(1):432–448, 2009.
[30] Shuguang Cui, A.J. Goldsmith, and A. Bahai. Energy efficiency of MIMO and cooperative MIMO techniques in sensor networks. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, 22(6):1089–1098, 2004.
[31] A.J. Goldsmith and S.B. Wicker. Design challenges for energy-costrained ad hoc
wireless networks. IEEE Wireless Communications, 9(4), 2002.

300

E. Calvanese Strinati et al.

[32] G. Miao, N. Himayat, Y.G. Li, and A. Swami, Crosslayer optimization for energyefficient wireless communications: A survey. Wireless Communications and Mobile
Computing, 9(4):529–542, 2009.
[33] V. Ramachandran, V. Kamble, and S. Kalyanasundaram. Frequency selective OFDMA
scheduler with limited feedback. In Proceedings of IEEE Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference, pp. 1604–1609, April 2008.
[34] 3GPP TSG-RAN1#48. Orange Labs, China Mobile, KPN, NTT DoCoMo, Sprint, TMobile, Vodafone, and Telecom Italia, R1-070674, LTE physical layer framework for
performance verification, v7.1.0, February 2007.
[35] 3GPP TR 25.892 V6.0.0. Feasibility study for Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) for UTRAN enhancement, June 2004.
[36] 3GPP TSG RAN, 3GPP TR.25814. Physical layer aspects for evolved UTRA (Release
7), v7.1.0, September 2006.
[37] D. Chase. Code combining – A maximum-likelihood decoding approach for combining an arbitrary number of noisy packets. IEEE Transactions on Communications,
33(5):385–393, May 1985.
[38] 3GPP TSG-RAN4#51. Alcatel-Lucent, picoChip Designs, and Vodafone, R4-092042,
Simulation assumptions and parameters for FDD HENB RF requirements, May 2009.
[39] B. Zubin, S. Andreas, A. Gunther, and H. Harald. Dynamic resource partitioning for
downlink femto-to-macro-cell interference avoidance. EURASIP Journal on Wireless
Communications and Networking, 2010.
[40] M.E. Sahin, I. Guvenc, Moo-Ryong Jeong, and H. Arslan. Handling CCI and ICI
in OFDMA femtocell networks through frequency scheduling. IEEE Transactions on
Consumer Electronics, 55(4):1936–1944, 2009.
[41] 3GPP TSG-RAN1#62, R1-105082. Way forward on eICIC for non-CA based HetNets,
August 2010.

Biographies
Emilio Calvanese Strinati obtained his Masters degree in 2001 from the
University of Rome La Sapienza and his PhD in Engineering Science in
2005 on “Radio link control for improving the QoS of wireless packet
transmission”. He started working at Motorola Labs in Paris in 2002. Then
in 2006 he joined the Centre for Atomic Energy (CEA) in Grenoble as a
research engineer. Since 2004 Emilio Calvanese Strinati has been giving
lectures at ENST, the University of Rome La Sapienza, and INPG-Grenoble
on physical and MAC layer topics. His main research topics are information
theory, advanced coding schemes, cooperative communications, scheduling,
resources allocation and green ICT for wireless mobile networks. In 2007 he
became a PhD supervisor. Emilio Calvanese Strinati has published around
50 papers in international conference proceedings and book chapters, and is
the main inventor or co-inventor of more than 20 patents. Since 2009 he is

Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

301

the Deputy Head of Telecommunication program in CEA.
Antonio De Domenico obtained his Masters degree from the University of
Rome La Sapienza, Rome, Italy, in 2008. He is currently working on his PhD
degree at the CEA/LETI Labs – MINATEC, Grenoble, France. Furthermore,
he is involved in the Inter-Carnot TEROPP and ICT-FP7 BeFEMTO
projects that respectively aim to successfully develop opportunistic radio
and femtocell technologies in order to enable a cost-efficient provisioning of
ubiquitous broadband services.
Laurent Herault was born in Tours, France, in 1964. He received his BS
degree in electrical engineering and MS degree in control engineering from
the Institute National Polytechnique de Grenoble (INPG) in 1987, and his
PhD degree in computer science from INPG in 1991. He won the Best Junior
Researcher Award from the University of Grenoble, France, in 1990. He is an
‘International Expert’ at CEA. From 2004, he is Director of the Telecommunications Program of CEA. Since 2010, he is Head of Wireless & Security
Labs in CEA-LETI.

