IEEE International Conference on Recent Advances and Innovations in Engineering (ICRAIE-2016), December 23-25, 2016, Jaipur, India

Green Measurement Metrics Towards a
Sustainable Software: A Systematic Literature
Review
Tribid Debbarma
Computer Science and Engineering Department
National Institute of Technology Agartala
Barjala, Tripura, India

Abstract— With the advancement in computing hardware’s the
complexity and energy consumption of software has increased
largely. There are various primary studies which uses different
software measurement metrics in green and sustainable software
development. In this paper we systematically reviewed and analyzed
different green measurement metrics in sustainable software. Our
objective is to find the recent studies in green metrics and find the
different state-of-the-art measures that is taking place in green
software development and engineering. We reviewed 14 studies with
different aspects of green metrics and sustainable software. This
review summarizes different green metrics and methods proposed in
the recent years.
Keywords—green
metrics;
sustainable
software;
measurement

I. INTRODUCTION
The Green House Gas(GHG) and CO2 emission is matter of
great concern for environmental sustainability. These
emissions are having different sources of origin. One of the
major reason is electricity power generation using nonrenewable sources (e.g. coal, gas). ICT is among one of the
major consumer of electrical energy [1]. The most important
components of ICT is it’s hardware and software. Though
software’s directly do not consume power but they are
indirectly responsible for power consumption due to its
execution in hardware’s. Now with the development of
hardware the complexity of software’s running in those
systems has increased in manifolds. Poorly designed and
developed software’s makes it difficult to maintain and
increases the power consumption of hardware’s.
Sustainability in terms of energy efficiency is one of the
area where studies are taking place in the software engineering
research field at present. Many software based empirical
studies has been conducted and being carried out to make
software’s more energy efficient. These studies has considered
many metrics to measure greenness of the software and to
develop an energy efficient, sustainable software.
It is necessary to have a cumulative view of those works to
find their effectiveness and what metrics has been worked on
to address the energy consumption issues. Also what aspects
have been considered, what degree of effectiveness the studies
have, what are their limitations and what aspects are there that
is yet to be addressed.

K Chandrasekaran
Computer Science and Engineering Department
National Institute of Technology Surathkal
Mangalore, India
A. Related Reviews
[3] in their systematic review have searched and analyzed
the green metrics used in software field for the period of 2000
to 2012. They have shown how metrics can be classified in
terms of resource, types of results and application domain
basis.
There has been some reviews on green metrics in software
but the field is changing rapidly and new proposals are made
to keep the energy consumption as low as possible with the
implementation of green metrics in software.
With this systematic literature review we have reviewed
different and recent primary studies on green software metrics
that are considered for development of energy efficient and
sustainable software systems. We considered primary studies
published from 2011 to 2015 and partially 2016.
We considered [2][10] guidelines on systematic review in
software engineering for conducting this review work.
[4][6][8][9][11]-[15] were studied for different guidelines and
suggestions. Fig. 1 shows the review structure and it’s flow of
steps from top towards bottom. In some cases the steps works
iteratively.
B. Structure of the Review
This review has three main phase and sub-phase within the
phases. It’s phase and sub phase is as given below1) Phase 1- Planning:
 Need for Review
 Research Question
 Review Protocol
2) Phase 2-Conducting Review:
 Search Relevant Works
 Study Selection
 Data Extraction
 Synthesis of Collected Data
3) Phase 3- Reporting:
 Specify the Reporting Strategy
 Formatting the Review Report

[978-1-5090-2807-8/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE]

Authorized licensed use limited to: Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT. Downloaded on July 31,2025 at 19:34:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE International Conference on Recent Advances and Innovations in Engineering (ICRAIE-2016), December 23-25, 2016, Jaipur, India



Documentation of the Report

limitations of these metrics can drive us towards working on
new metrics.
B. Research Questions

RQ1. What are the proposed metrics for green
and sustainability in software engineering?

RQ2. What methods are proposed for
measurement of these metrics?

RQ3. What are the limitations of the proposed
methods?

RQ4. Which domain area has been addressed?

RQ5. What evidence are available against the
solutions?
C. Review Protocol
The studies on green software has increased in the recent
years, from the review report [3], it is found that most of the
green metrics has been proposed in the first decade of twenty
first century. In the recent years there has been increase in
Conferences e.g. Software Engineering for Sustainability
(SE4S) and Green and Sustainable Software (GREENS),
which specifically publishes research articles on green and
sustainable software and Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) domain. This review protocol will find the
metrics and measurement methods that has been considered/
proposed in green and sustainable software in the recent years.
We discussed the steps of the review in the following
subsections.

Fig. 1

Review framework (adopted from [10])

II. RESEARCH METHOD
The review method is discussed in 3 steps. The first step is
research question for the review, which defines the aim of
research, second step is review protocol to be followed for
conducting the literature review. The review protocol is
further divided in subsection which defines what data sources
to be searched, the Strategy for searching the primary studies
with the search strings, study selection based on inclusion
exclusion criteria, than data extraction and synthesis process
for the selected studies.
A. Need for Review
Software sustainability and energy efficiency in software is
the need of the hour in the current ICT ecosystem. Systematic
review on the state of the art of different primary studies in
green Software measurement can lead us to the metrics and
methods most used and their degree of effectiveness in
achieving the green software sustainability. Also the

The subsection data source discusses about the source of
the studies, section search strategy discusses about how the
search of studies in different online venues to be carried out
that relevant studies must not missed out. The subsection
inclusion and exclusion criteria discusses the inclusion of
studies on the basis of criteria set with respect to the research
questions of this review work, exclusion criteria is set on the
basis of research question criteria fulfillment and other criteria
set for quality review, data extraction section gives the
details on the data collection process from the selected studies
for further synthesis of the studies and synthesis section
analyses the extracted data on a set of questions to answer the
review questions in a summarized way.
1) Data Sources: In Computer Science field most of research
article/literature is published in online venues. So,
choosing of reputed journal and conference publication
sources will cover most of the literatures in the software
engineering field. Major conference venues and journal
venues, that publishes studies in the field and related fields
will be searched. The major online literature database and
search engines have been utilized to find the relevant
studies with the specified keywords. The online sources of
TABLE I. has been searched for finding the study articles.
TABLE I.
Data sources
ACM Digital Library
IEEEXplore
ISI Web of knowledge

SEARCHED ONLINE VENUES
Website
http:// dl.acm.org
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org
http://www.sciencedirect.com

Authorized licensed use limited to: Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT. Downloaded on July 31,2025 at 19:34:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE International Conference on Recent Advances and Innovations in Engineering (ICRAIE-2016), December 23-25, 2016, Jaipur, India
Scopus
SpringerLink
Wiley Interscience

http://www.scopus.com
http://link.springer.com
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com

The above source venues publishes and stores most of the
reputed Journal and Conference proceedings in the software
engineering field.
2) Search Strategy: Present database of research literature is
very large. The search engines can return large number of
search results if the search keywords and other
information’s are not provided properly. e.g. searching
only the titles may miss out some studies which may be
relevant to search field and the number of results may be
restricted but choosing of the whole literature would return
huge number of results which would make the review
process difficult. Most literatures describe about the study
in the abstract section, by including the abstract filed for
search will return relevant studies and the number will not
be too large. The search process of the review work is
discussed below.
We have considered only online sources for our search, as
most of the software literatures are available online and search
in hardcopy is a time consuming process. With generic
keywords it returns a huge number of results, which are not
related to the metrics and its measurement methods. Most of
the related work in the software sustainability field took place
only after 2000 (as mentioned in [3]) and it has gained
considerable attention in the recent years. We considered our
search from 2011 to 2016, to find the recent advancements in
green measurement metrics and methods that has been
proposed in the sustainable software field.
As discussed in the Introduction section, the objective of
this systematic review is to find information on green metrics
used in sustainable software engineering. To search the
relevant studies stored in different databases we formulated
search key strings based on the keyword terms and their
related words and synonyms that are used in the literature with
similar meanings.
In software engineering the term/keyword metrics is
associated with different methods for measuring of resources
related to software e.g. the software energy consumption.
The term sustainable is used in context to software energy
efficiency, reusability and minimal impact on the
environment, from software engineering perspective, green,
sustainability, environmental are used synonymously in
similar context. Software engineering term relates to software
development phases and functions in the computing systems.
The main keywords/terms in this literature survey are :
Green, Metric, Sustainable, Software Engineering. Here the
term green and sustainable are used in same context so we
will use three instead of four keyword terms. In TABLE II. the
terms with related words are grouped, words in same column

will have logical OR relation and between the columns it will
be logical AND relation.
TABLE II. represents the index terms and related terms
used in the software engineering field.
TABLE II. USED KEYWORDS
metrics
measurement

sustainable
sustainability

method
measure

green
environmental

software
software
development
software engineering

The search will create a structure as following : The search
terms within the same column have logical OR relationship
and between the columns/groups they have AND relationship.
Combination of the terms with logical operators would form a
search string which would be able to search most relevant
studies in the particular search area.
Considering the terms associated with the online databases
have different search options, in the most basic one it takes
simple words and returns results having any of the words in
the article. This type of search can result in huge number of
article against the simple search term. Using the advanced or
command search options it allows combining of terms with
logical operators (OR, AND, NOT) and would make the
search scope limited to the search subject and other filter
options such as year range and topic that would help in
minimizing the search result and returns relevant to the topic.
Search String(SS) is the combination of words, related
terms and synonyms with logical relations to find different
relevant articles. With the defined search terms we formed the
following search string and searched in ACM Digital library.
[SS1] : (metrics OR measure OR measurement) AND (method
OR process OR system) AND (sustainable OR green OR
environmental) AND (“software engineering” OR “software
development” OR computing)
This search string with publication year range 2011
onwards returned a total of 751 different articles. It is not
possible to review this large number of studies. So, we further
modified the search string and executed the search in the same
online site with [SS2] : (metrics OR measurement OR method)
AND (sustainable OR green OR “energy efficient”) AND
(“software engineering” OR “software development OR
Computing”). With [SS2] it returned a total of 139 articles
and further with the filter (only ACM proceedings) it has
reduced to 82 items. This number of studies is manageable and
we proceeded with this search string for further search in other
databases.
In our further search process with the [SS2], it returns
higher number of results. To further reduce the search results
and filter out the previous literature review works in that we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT. Downloaded on July 31,2025 at 19:34:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE International Conference on Recent Advances and Innovations in Engineering (ICRAIE-2016), December 23-25, 2016, Jaipur, India

included logical NOT with “systematic review”. This search
when conducted in Wiley Interscience database returned a
total of 100 articles, for the publishing year 2011 onwards. For
springerlink the previous search string was changed to the
below form to adapt its search command format, [SS3]:
“metric AND OR AND method AND AND AND sustainable
AND OR AND green AND OR AND energy AND efficient
AND AND AND software AND engineering AND NOT
(systematic AND review)”
We scoped our search, to articles published 2011 onwards
to cover only the recent studies related to sustainable software
and green metrics.
3) Selection of Studies: Search results with the search
string and other process can return a large number of
articles, which might contain articles not relevant to
the search. The selection of relevant studies has to be
performed on the articles collected with the search
strategy. Different criteria for selection and exclusion
of studies are performed on the set of searched
preliminary studies.
The inclusion, exclusion criteria is designed to cover the
research questions and certain level of quality articles.
Different conditions for the study selection are discussed
below:
Inclusion Criteria(IC)
IC1 : Primary studies on green, sustainable software and
metrics
IC2 : Studies with proposed systems and methods for
sustainable software
IC3 : Studies published in reputed publication venues
Exclusion Criteria(EC)
EC1 : Studies with no results and evidence.
EC2 : Studies that are not based on metrics, measurement of
software’s
EC3 : Studies which does not satisfy the research question
EC4 : Study not peer reviewed
A study is selected if it satisfies all the inclusion criteria
and no exclusion criteria is satisfied. During the checking for
exclusion criteria if a study is failed in the first criteria itself
than the study can be excluded without checking for other
exclusion criteria. All this process is conducted in a
spreadsheet for each of the studies found after search strategy.
After applying the selection criteria finally 14 number of
studies were selected for detailed final review.
4) Data Extraction: The selected studies data must be
collected for later synthesis with relevant fields that
collects the required information based on Research
question. The information was extracted from the
selected studies with a data collection form as in the
Table III. Data extraction is performed to all the

selected study, and record is maintained in a
spreadsheet with individual study details.
TABLE III. DATA EXTRACTION/COLLECTION FORM
Sl No.
S1
S2
S3
S4

Field
Author
Study Title
Year
Venue

S6
S7
S8
S9
S10
S11
S12
S13

Metrics considered
Measurement method
Measured resources
Metric purpose
Level of tool support
Evidence level
Limitations
Domain area

Description/Question
Name of the author
Title of the selected study
Publication year
publication venue (Conference or
Journal name)
RQ1
RQ2
RQ1
RQ2
RQ3
RQ5
RQ3
RQ4

5) Data Synthesis:
After the data extraction is
performed on the selected studies the extracted data
in different field of the data extraction form must be
processed to bring out information from each of the
field. The term Study Title is the name of the
article/study selected for the review, Year signifies
the year of publication for that study. The collection
of all the publication years can give us information
on year wise publication pattern for the particular
area. The term Venue is the name of the conference
or journal the study is published. This can identify in
which venues most of the publication in the particular
area is taking place. Metrics considered term refers
to the metric that has been used in the study, e.g.
“energy consumption” by software can be a metric
used in software sustainability measurement.
The data extraction terms collects individual studies data
which in combination with other terms and collectively
number of studies can provide a significant information or
pattern that we are looking for. “Measurement method” term
collects the different ways of measuring a particular metric
e.g. “power consumption” measurement can be measured
using estimation method or using a device, where the quality
and accuracy of the method can make difference in the results.
Metrics purpose is meant for the purpose of using the metric
i.e. for measurement, estimation and Measured resources is
the resources that are measured by the metric e.g. CPU usage,
memory usage etc. Level of tool support and Evidence level
terms are used whether the study uses any tool, has results to
support the claims made in the study, and what extent they
have been used by other research community or industry
respectively.
A single study cannot fulfill all the desired research
objectives it may have some limitations, the term Limitations
has to be filled with the conclusions and analysis of a study
and by making certain query to the study. For example
simulation methods only mimics a system, it is not the actual
execution of a system, in real execution the results may

Authorized licensed use limited to: Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT. Downloaded on July 31,2025 at 19:34:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE International Conference on Recent Advances and Innovations in Engineering (ICRAIE-2016), December 23-25, 2016, Jaipur, India

significantly vary if not performed correctly. The Domain
area term is to extract where studied software metric is to be
used, e.g. in Datacenters, Networks or Mobile computing etc..
III. REVIEW RESULTS
This section discusses about the results collected after the
review process conduction of different phases as listed in the
review protocol section. The first step of the review is search
for the primary studies for systematic review against the
research question and objective of this review method. Results
of different phases are discussed belowA. Search results
With the search string defined in the search strategy
section we conducted searches on the previously identified
online databases.
With the search string [SS1] conducted on IEEE Explore
online database it returned 230 numbers of article. We further
applied filters e.g. “conference and journal publications only”,
to remove the non relevant studies. With the search year 2011
onwards it returned 118 number of articles. For Sciencedirect
database the search string ((metrics OR measurement OR
method ) AND (sustainable OR green OR ”energy efficient”)
AND (”software engineering” OR ”software development OR
Computing”)) search resulted a total of 4517 number of
articles. This number of article is not feasible to be reviewed.
To filter and remove the non relevant articles and fields we
have chosen only specific journal publications related to
software field such as “Journals of Systems and Software”.
With this filters it retuned 82 articles.
We further conducted search on other database-ACM
Digital Library, Scopus, Wiley Interscience, Springerlink and
ISI Web of Knowledge. TABLE IV. represents the results
acquired from different online sources after executing the
search strings.
The total number of studies for all the search result was
522 studies/articles. We also searched using Google to find
any relevant articles. This search results contain duplicate
searches. Using the reference managers “Mendley” and
“JabRef” we removed the duplicate search results.
TABLE IV.

SEARCHED STUDY NUMBERS AFTER INITIAL SEARCH

Online Sources
ACM Digital Library
IEEEXplore
Sciencedirect
Scopus
Springerlink
Web of knowledge
Wiley InterScience

Search Results
82
118
82
78
46
16
100

B. Selection of Studies Result
The search results has many articles which are not related

to the research question. We performed the selection of studies
in phases.
Selection phases are:
 Title reading
 Abstract Reading
 Full text Reading
 Apply Inclusion and Exclusion criteria
At first, we read the study title for all the searches, titles
which do not relate to software sustainability and metrics were
discarded from the list. Secondly, we considered the abstract
for selection of probable studies. Abstract provides the
information on the objective and solutions. The studies with
no relevant information were further discarded and the
abstracts having related information are chosen for further
full-text reading.
In total 55 articles were chosen for review after full-text
reading. We further applied the Inclusion and Exclusion
Criteria and total 14 primary studies were selected for the final
review. TABLE V. is list of the included studies/articles.
TABLE VI. is list of studies not selected for final review.
TABLE X. provides details of selected studies source and
venue.
TABLE V. SELECTED STUDIES FOR REVIEW

Study
ID.
A1

Ref.
no.
[17]

A2

[18]

A3

[19]

A4
A5

[20]
[22]

A6

[23]

A7

[24]

A8

[25]

A9

[28]

A10

[29]

A11

[30]

A12
A13
A14

[31]
[33]
[32]

TABLE VI.

Title
EACOF: A framework for providing Energy
Transparency to enable Energy-Aware Software
Development
How to measure Energy-Efficiency of Software:
Metrics and Measurement results
Towards Power Reduction Through Improve Software
Design
Runtime Monitoring of Software Energy Hotspots
SEFLab: A Lab for Measuring Software Energy
Footprints
A first Approach on legacy system energy
consumption measurement
Is Software green? Application development
environments and energy efficiency in open source
application
Green Software requirements and measurement:
random decision forests-based software energy
consumption profiling
An Approach to Measuring Kernel Energy in
Software Applications
Measuring Software Sustainability from a Process
Centric Perspective
An
Algorithm-Centric Energy-Aware Design
Methodology
Towards Sustainable Software Engineering
Towards a Green and Sustainable Software
Evaluation of Software Product Quality Attributes and
Environmental Attributes using ANP Decision
Framework
STUDIES NOT INCLUDED FOR FINAL REVIEW

Studies not selected for
final review

Ref. no.
[5], [7], [16], [21], [26],
[27]

Authorized licensed use limited to: Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT. Downloaded on July 31,2025 at 19:34:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE International Conference on Recent Advances and Innovations in Engineering (ICRAIE-2016), December 23-25, 2016, Jaipur, India

C. Data Extraction
After selection of the primary studies, different
information were collected using the Data Extraction form in
a spreadsheet. This form has different fields. The results for
different term/field of the extraction form are given belowTABLE VII. METRICS CONSIDERED
Metrics
Energy/Power Consumption
Environmental
Performance

Studies
A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6
A14, A10
A14

Most of the studies are based on energy or power
consumption metrics. Some studies are studied in context of
environmental measures of the software. [17] proposed an
energy aware software development framework, it uses
Resource Utilization Model (RUM), it measures CPU usage
on execution of applications using the Power API. [24]
proposed energy efficient open source software development
systems and a support tool based on statistical measurement of
applications energy consumption.
[31] in their study considered the environmental metric of
software sustainability. Using the tool GreenTracker different
applications CPU Usage can be measured which can help in
choosing the software with lesser power consumption and
environmentally more suitable.
TABLE VIII. USED MEASUREMENT METHODS
Measurement
methods

Description

Studies

Estimation

Estimates based
some model

Measurement

Actual
measurement
using device

A5

Statistical

prediction based on use
of pattern

A7

on

A7, A9, A11, A12

In most of the studies estimation based measuring methods
are used. [33] in their study proposed a tool TEEC to measure
the an applications energy usage. It measurement of energy
usage is estimation based on a power model.
It is found from the studies that system resource CPU is
the most measured resource. Besides that memory, network
usage, and applications are also measured. TABLE IX. shows
measured resources in different studies.

TABLE X.
Study ID
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A6
A7
A8
A9
A10
A11
A12
A13
A14

SELECTED STUDIES SOURCE AND VENUE

Venue
SAC
GREENS
ENERGYTECH
ASE
GREENS
ICGSE
IST
Requirements Engg.
ICEAC
ICSPPM
IEEE Transactions on VLSI
Systems
ICSE
Concurrent Engg.
RE4SuSy

Source
ACM
IEEE
IEEE
ACM
IEEE
Elsevier
Springer
IEEE
IEEE
IEEE
IEEE
Techrepublic

Year
2014
2012
2012
2012
2013
2015
2011
2015
2011
2012
2014
2012
2015
2014

D. Synthesis of Extracted Data
Based on the selected studies the review protocol was
carried out. Which we further synthesized as per the
requirements set in our review rules. We perform synthesis on
the data collected by during the data extraction. To answer the
research questions the extracted data was processed.
What are the proposed metrics for green and sustainability in
software engineering?
Different metrics e.g. energy, performance, environment
are the metrics that are being studied most. TABLE VII. is list
of metrics.
What methods are proposed for measurement of these
metrics?
For measurement of metrics, estimation based method are
mostly used which depends on power models and Statistical
calculations. TABLE VIII. summarizes the used measurement
methods by different studies.
What are the limitations of the proposed methods?
Most of the studies are conducted in the academia with no
proper evidence of acceptance in the industry it is hard to
validate the methods quality. The tool “GreenTracker”
developed by [21], [31] is adopted in Mac OS and Windows
OS system, which makes it evident that the system has certain
standard.
IV. ANALYSIS

TABLE IX.
Measured resources
CPU
Software code
System components

MEASURED RESOURCES
Studies
A1, A6, A8, A11
A2,
A3, A7

From the extracted and processed data it is found that
green metrics in sustainable software area considers energy
metrics as one of the best measure for achieving sustainability
in software. Other metrics like the environmental attributes
and qualities are not considered in many studies. It is observed
that studies are conducted and proposed to make energy

Authorized licensed use limited to: Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT. Downloaded on July 31,2025 at 19:34:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE International Conference on Recent Advances and Innovations in Engineering (ICRAIE-2016), December 23-25, 2016, Jaipur, India

efficient application by creating energy-aware software.
Studies are also considered for software sustainability in
different domains such as Mobile, Network and Datacenters.
The metrics energy and performance are the most studied
ones, there is less study in other aspect of software
sustainability such as pollution, recycling of software. Study
in this less researched aspects of sustainable software along
with the energy aspects can help in achieving long-term
solution for sustainability in software development.
V. CONCLUSION
From the review it is observed that most of the studies
related to green metrics in the sustainable software field is on
energy consumption metric. The measurement methods for
energy consumption are based on mostly estimation based.
There is few studies on software code profiling for energy
efficient and energy aware based software design methods. In
our future work we will conduct a review on larger scale to
cover all the scopes of software sustainability measures and
there adoption in the industry.
REFERENCES
[1]

National Renewable Energy laboratory, http://www.nrel.gov/publications.
[2] B. Kitchenham, and S. Charters, “Guidelines for Performing Systematic
Literature Reviews in Software Engineering”, Software Engineering
Group, School of Computer Science and Mathematics, Keele University,
EBSE Technical Report Version 2.3, July 2007.
[3] P. Bozzelli, Q. Gu, and P. Lago, “A systematic literature review on
green software metrics” Technical report, VU Amsterdam, 2013.
[4] M. S. Ali, M. A. Babar, L. Chen, K. Stol “A Systematic Review of
Comparative Evidence of Aspect-Oriented Programming”, Information
and Software Technology, vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 871-887, 2010.
[5] A. Kansal, F. Zhao, J. Liu, N. Kothari, and A.A. Bhattacharya, “Virtual
machine power metering and provisioning,” In Proceedings of the 1st
ACM symposium on Cloud computing, SoCC 10
[6] P. Brereton, B. A. Kitchenham, D. Budgen, M. Turner, and M. Khalil,
“Lessons from applying the systematic literature review process within
the software engineering domain,” J. Syst. Softw., 80(4):571583, Apr.
2007.
[7] E. Capra, C. Francalanci, and S.A. Slaughter, “Is software green?
Application development environments and energy efficiency in open
source applications,” Inf. Softw. Technol., 54(1):6071, Jan. 2012.
[8] B.A. Kitchenham, T. Dyba, and M. Jorgensen, “Evidence-based
software engineering,” Proceedings of the 26th International Conference
on Software Engineering, 2004, pp. 273-281.
[9] V. Alves, N. Niu, C. Alves, “Requirements Engineering for Software
Product Lines: A Systematic Literature Review,” Information and
Software Technology, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 806-820, Aug. 2010.
[10] B. Kitchenham and S. Charters, “Guidelines for Performing Systematic
Literature Reviews in Software Engineering,” Technical Report EBSE2007-01, Software Eng. Group, Keele Univ. and Dept. of Computer
Science, Univ. of Durham, UK, 2007.
[11] D. I. K. Sjoberg, T. Dyba, and M. Jorgensen, “The future of empirical
methods in software engineering research,” Proceedings of the Future of
Software Engineering, 2007, pp. 358-378.

[12] A. Kofod-Petersen, “How to do a Structured Literature Review in
computer science Version 0.2,” August 13, 2014.
[13] B. Kitchenham, “Procedures for performing systematic reviews,” Joint
Technical Report, Keele University Technical report TR/ SE-0401,
ISSN: 1353-7776. NICTA Technical Report 0400011T.1, 2004.
[14] M. Jorgensen, and M.Shepperd, “A Systematic Review of Software
Development Cost Estimation Studies,” IEEE T Software Eng, 33, 1
(Jan. 2007), pp. 33-53.
[15] B. Kitchenham, O. P. Brereton, D. Budgen, and Z. Li, “An Evaluation of
Quality Checklist Proposals A Participant-Observer Case study,” Proc.
13th Intl Conf. Evaluation and Assessment in Software Eng. (EASE),
pp. 1-10, 2009.
[16] G. Dhiman, G. Marchetti, and T. Rosing, “vGreen: A System for
Energy-Efficient Management of Virtual Machines,” ACM Trans.
Design Autom. Electr. Syst., 16(1):6, 2010.
[17] H. Field, G. Anderson, and K. Eder, “EACOF, A Framework for
Providing Energy Transparency to Enable Energy-aware Software
Development,” Proceedings of the 29th Annual ACM Symposium on
Applied Computing, ACM, 2014, 1194 -1199
[18] T. Johann, “How to measure Energy-Efficiency of Software: Metrics
and Measurement results,” GREENS 2012
[19] C. Sahin, “Towards Power Reduction Through Improve Software
Design,” ENERGYTECH 2012
[20] A. Nouredine, “Runtime Monitoring of Software Energy Hotspots,”
ASE, 2012.
[21] N. Amsel, and B. Tomlinson, “Green tracker: a tool for estimating the
energy consumption of software,” Proceedings of the 28th of the
international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in
computing systems - CHI EA ’10, (2010), 3337.
[22] M. A. Ferreira, “SEFLab: A Lab for Measuring Software Energy
Footprints,” GREENS 2013.
[23] V. Cordero, “A first Approach on legacy system energy consumption
measurment,” IEEE 10th ICGSE workshops, 2015.
[24] E. Capra, “Is Software green? Application development environments
and energy efficiency in open source application,” Information and
Software Technology journal , Elsevier, 2011.
[25] M. A. Beghoura, “Green Software requirements and measurement:
random decision forests-based software energy consumption profiling,”
Requirements Engg., Springer, 2015.
[26] A. Hindle, “Green Mining: a methodology of relating software change
and configuration to power consumption,” Empirical Software
Engineering, springer, 2013.
[27] L. Corral, “Can Execution Time Describe Accurately the Energy
Consumption of Mobile Apps? An Experiment in Android,” GREENS
2014.
[28] M. Dabbagh, H. Hajj,W. E. Hajj “An Approach to Measuring Kernel
Energy in Software Applications,” International Conference on Energy
Aware Computing (ICEAC), IEEE, 2011.
[29] G. Lami, “Measuring Software Sustainability from a Process Centric
Perspective,” 2012 Joint Conference of the 22nd International Workshop
on Software Measurement and the 2012 Seventh International
Conference on Software Process and Product Measurement. 2012.
[30] H. Hajj, “An Algorithm-Centric Energy-Aware Design Methodology,”
IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems,
2014.
[31] N. Amsel, “Towards Sustainable Software Engineering” (NIER Track),
2011, ICSE 2012.
[32] S. A. Kocak , G. I. Alptekin , A. B. Bener, “Evaluation of Software
Product Quality Attributes and Environmental Attributes using ANP
Decision Framework,” International Workshop on Requirements
Engineering for Sustainable Systems (RE4SuSy), 2014.
[33] H. Acar, G. I. Alptekin, Jean-Patrick Gelas, P. Ghodous, “Towards a
Green and Sustainable Software,” Concurrent Engineering 2015, Jul
2015, Delf, Netherlands. pp.471- 480.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT. Downloaded on July 31,2025 at 19:34:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

