Public Policy

E d i t o r : S t e p h e n R u t h • r u t h @ g m u .e d u

Green IT — More Than
a Three Percent Solution?
Stephen Ruth • George Mason University

IT infrastructure is definitely going green. From significant new regulations for
IT equipment disposal to stringent energy-efficiency specifications for PCs and
monitors to national standards for data center power savings, green IT is an
“in” topic. But many problems are unsolved. Will telecommuting make a difference or is it too difficult to manage? Will cloud computing reduce the number
of large data centers? Can legislation diminish e-waste challenges?

I

nformation and communications technology
(ICT) infrastructure accounts for roughly 3
percent of global electricity usage and the
same percentage of greenhouse gasses (GHGs),­1–3
but it seems to have a far greater role in the green
debate than that. Many of the solutions being
introduced for reducing the carbon footprint via
more efficient energy use worldwide are heavily
dependent on IT — for example, improvements
in the power grid, “energy-smart” buildings and
cities, and so on. Here, I examine green issues
and solutions in IT infrastructure and give a
brief history behind green computing.

Green Computing Development

The “green computing” idea started in 1992
when the US Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) launched Energy Star, a voluntary labeling approach to recognize electronic equipment’s energy-efficiency characteristics. Energy
Star has now become an important certification,
with significant name recognition in the US and
beyond. Today, servers, laptops, gaming systems, and many other IT equipment offerings
include Energy Star compliance in their product
descriptions. EPEAT — another popular green IT
benchmark — is associated with compliance with
IEEE standards for monitors, PCs, and laptops
and offers highly coveted bronze, silver, and
gold ratings for compliance. Vendors take these
standards seriously in product development and
advertising. Apple’s current Macbook Pro advertising prominently mentions high ratings from
Energy Star and EPEAT along with other green
features, such as recyclable aluminum and glass
74

Published by the IEEE Computer Society

structures, mercury-free LED-backlit displays,
arsenic-free glass, and PVC-free internal cables
(www.apple.com/macbook/environment.html).

E-Waste

Used-equipment dumping is perhaps the most
legislated and litigated green IT issue. Many
states now regulate electronic-waste disposal,
including computers, printers, video gaming
systems, monitors, television sets, and so on.
Seventy percent of all hazardous waste is ewaste, which is bulky, complicated to recycle,
and sometimes contains unsafe levels of heavy
metals and other dangerous chemicals. The laws
enacted so far range from simple prohibition of
e-waste in landfills to detailed requirements for
collection, transportation, and recycling. The
current US congressional session is considering significant legislation aimed at a uniform
approach that would unscramble the various ewaste regulations already implemented in nearly
half the states. The proposed bill’s opening statement lays out the challenge: “The EPA estimates
that over 25 billion computers, televisions, cell
phones, printers, gaming systems, and other devices have been sold since 1980, generating 2
million tons of unwanted electronic devices in
2005 alone, with only 15 to 20 percent being
recycled.”4 The Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition
estimates that there are 500 million obsolete
computers in the US and that 130 million cell
phones are thrown out every year (www.etoxics.
org/site/PageSer ver?pagename=sv tc_global
_ewaste_crisis). Where does the recycled ewaste from the US go? Mostly to developing

1089-7801/09/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE

IEEE INTERNET COMPUTING

Authorized licensed use limited to: Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT. Downloaded on July 31,2025 at 19:25:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Green IT

nations with more relaxed environmental regulations, especially China, India, and Pakistan.5 Pending
the enactment of the legislation, 18
states plus New York City have mandated e-waste recycling, and all but
California require manufacturers
to pay for it. Electronic equipment
manufacturers and distributors are
concerned that the states’ differing
regulations could bring uncertainty into their business plans (www.
electronicstakeback.com/legislation/
state_legislation.htm).

major production processes in terms
of annual emissions; for example,
2008 CO2 emissions (www.hp.com/
hpinfo/globalcitizenship/gcreport/
intro/ceoletter.html), measured in
tons, were from

Data Centers and Servers

IBM, with 8 million square feet of
data centers, has drawn some inferences from its own energy use experiences. The company found that
whereas data centers occupied only
6 percent of the total allocated floor
space, they constituted more than
30 percent of IBM’s total electrical
expense. Non-IT machinery, such
as cooling systems, fans, pumps,
UPSs, and so on, account for more
than half of data centers’ electricity bills. IBM consults extensively
with its clients to reduce the total
data center cost and claims that, in
some consulting engagements, the
savings approach 40 percent.7 General Electric has a 29,000 squarefoot installation in Ohio housing
nearly 4,000 IT systems, which annually consume 24 million kilowatt
hours (kWh). By using many of their
own products, they’ve reduced the
cost for cooling the center by 11
percent; 2 to 3 million gallons of
water will be saved — a 20 percent
reduction — and water treatment
chemicals reduced by half (www.ge
newscenter.com/Content/Detail.asp
?ReleaseID=5653&NewsAreaID=2&
MenuSearchCategoryID=). The Department of Energy (DoE) maintains a Web site with success stories
on data center energy management. For example, Lucas Films estimated savings of 3 million kWh
in energy by selectively investing
in energy-efficient equipment and

Data center energy and emissions
costs are a major concern in green
IT analysis because more than half
of all IT-related electrical costs are
generated there, from small installations to massive facilities with
thousands of servers and tens of
thousands of associated workstations. In 2005, the power and cooling
cost for servers worldwide was US$26
billion, and that cost is forecasted to
top $40 billion by next year (http://
wh itepaper s.zdnet.com/abstract.
aspx?docid=327188). A Gart­ner study
found that data centers, with their
associated servers, air conditioning, fans, pumps, uninterruptible
power supply (UPS), and so on, use
100 times the energy per square
foot of an office building.6 Reducing
server electrical needs is definitely
part of manufacturers’ competitive position. Two years ago, Sun
Microsystems Coolthreads servers (advertising “sips power, gulps
data”) claimed fivefold increases in
performance at one-fifth the power
and one-fourth the space (www.sun.
com/servers/coolthreads/overview)
as earlier models. Both IBM and HP,
significant manufacturers of servers
and other IT equipment used in data
centers, have major commitments to
reducing energy costs internally as
well as for their clients and customers. HP’s annual global citizenship
report describes the footprint for all
JULY/AUGUST 2009

• operations — 1.442 million;
• manufacturing (including firsttier suppliers) — 3.5 million;
• product transport — 1.8 million;
and
• e mploye e bu si ne s s t r ave l —
425,000.

software — leading to bottom-line
reductions of $343,000 in the first
year and full investment return
in 1.2 years (www1.eere.energy.
gov/industry/saveenergynow/pdfs/
43651.pdf).
The $787 billion stimulus bill
passed in March 2009 included significant funding for technology
upgrades and improvements — $7
billion for broadband, especially to
rural areas; $19 billion for health IT;
$4.5 billion for an improved electricity grid, and so on. It also included
$50 million in tax incentives for
projects that promote IT energy efficiency. This funding, part of $16.8
billion awarded to the US Department
of Commerce’s Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy division for spurring IT growth, can be used directly
for data center projects, improved
telecommunications hub operations,

Cisco Systems, Inc. is accepting resumes
for the following position in:

Lawrenceville, GA

Hardware Engineer
(Ref#: LV1)

Responsible for the specification, design,
development, test, enhancement and sustaining
of networking hardware.
Please mail resumes with reference number to
Cisco Systems, Inc., Attn: J51W, 170 W. Tasman
Drive, Mail Stop: SJC 5/1/4, San Jose, CA 95134. No
phone calls please. Must be legally authorized to
work in the U.S. without sponsorship. EOE.

www.cisco.com
75

Authorized licensed use limited to: Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT. Downloaded on July 31,2025 at 19:25:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Public Policy

and many other green IT needs
(www.forbes.com/2009/03/10/data
-center-legislation-technology-cio
-network-data-center.html).

certification, indicating success in
meeting dozens of energy criteria
(www.epeat.net).

PCs, Monitors,
and Workstations

Microsoft, the world’s largest software
company, has clearly made green IT
an integral part of its strategy. As
described in its annual Corporate
Citizenship Report (www.microsoft.
com/about/corporatecitizenship/us/
default.mspx), new Microsoft facilities must meet Leeds’ silver energyefficiency standards for buildings and
reduce electricity costs by 20 percent.
In software applications, they claim
that Windows Vista saves roughly
$50 per year in electrical costs per PC,

PCs on average use only about 100
watts of power, but there are well
over a billion of them in the world,
so the combined electrical requirement is large. HP claims that their
latest Energy-Star-qualified PC with
full power-management features
uses only one-fourth the power of
a PC without these features (www.
hp.com/sbso/solutions/pc_expertise/
energy-efficient-computing.html).

Software

An ITIF report found that, if only 14 percent
of existing American office jobs were converted
to work-from-home jobs, the savings would
be dramatic.
Thin-client approaches, which rely
on “dumb” data terminals that do
minimal computing and use very
little electricity, can also save energy, especially in large systems. Thin
clients reduce hardware and maintenance costs, and they can also
reduce total energy expense. Monitors are also coming under increasing scrutiny for green compliance.
The EPA’s fifth upgrade in Energy
Star requirements for monitors — released on 1 April 2009 — requires a
20 percent increase in electrical efficiency. The EPA estimates that, if
all monitors comply, this upgrade
alone will achieve savings of roughly $1 billion per year in energy expenses and avoid GHG emissions
equivalent to 1.5 million cars (www.
f m lin k.com/News/A r ticles/news.
cgi?display=article&id=25660). Almost 500 different monitors currently show either silver or gold EPEAT
76 		

which reduces carbon emissions by 3
million tons annually. They also expect an additional savings in travel,
meeting expenses, and so on, via unified software solutions and working
with other companies. The Climate
Savers Computing Initiative outlines
an additional goal of reducing the
carbon footprint due to computer use
by 54 million tons in 2009.
Virtualization software manages
large clusters of separate, individual
servers as if they were a single, virtual computer. In a data center with
thousands of servers, there can be
considerable idle time as equipment
waits for sequentially assigned tasks
using electricity and cooling power
while doing no computing. Virtualization harnesses these resources by
increasing server sharing and utilization, thereby reducing electrical cost.
Advanced virtualization systems can
function across single or multiple opwww.computer.org/internet/

erating systems — Windows, Unix,
Linux, and so on. A downside to
virtualization is that its complexity
requires frequent maintenance and
support tools, but it’s a major contributor to electricity efficiency in data
centers, and industry now recognizes
it as a resource for increasing automation, reclaiming resources (idle virtual
machines, for example), and recasting CPU and memory (http://esj.com/
Articles/2009/04/14/Virtualization
-Benefits.aspx?).
Power-management tools — software for managing electrical systems as complicated as clusters of
office or residential buildings or as
simple as an individual PC — are
delivering multimillion dollar savings. In the Pacific Northwest, the
Energy Star power-management tool
Portfolio Manager showed potential
energy savings of 6 to 15 percent
for more than 20 buildings (www.
nwa l l ia nce.or g/ou r work /projec t
summary.aspx?ID=89). For individual PCs, power-management tools’
effects are equally impressive. Here
are some reported savings for several
power-management offerings, as reported by Energy Star (www.energy
star.gov/index.cfm?c=power_mgt.
pr_power_mgt_ss#ge):
• Verizon — $7 million for 185,000
PCs;
• Yale — $40 per PC;
• Dell — 40 percent on energy costs
by using 1E NightWatchman
and SMSWakeUp software on its
desktop and notebook computers;
• GE — $2.5 million on 75,000 PCs;
and
• Fusion Trade — $70 per PC by using EZ GPO and Windows Task
Scheduler for overnight system
updates.
Spam causes emissions, too. A
recent report from McAfee shows
spam’s electricity profile effect,
based on 62 trillion spam messages
in 2008: the average spam email
IEEE INTERNET COMPUTING

Authorized licensed use limited to: Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT. Downloaded on July 31,2025 at 19:25:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Green IT

causes emissions equivalent to 0.3
grams of carbon dioxide (CO2) per
message; globally, annual spam energy use totals 33 billion kWh, or 33
terawatt hours (tWh) — that’s equivalent to the electricity used in 2.4 million homes every year, with the same
GHG emissions as 3.1 million automobiles using two billion US gallons
of gasoline. Spam filtering saves 135
tWh of electricity per year (http://
img.en25.com/Web/McAfee/Carbon
Footprint_28pg_web_REV.PDF).

Telecommuting

A significant unknown factor in
green IT planning is the true effect
of telecommuting. One optimistic
recent prediction is that, if half the
eligible workers would telecommute,
it would save, enough oil to free the
US of more than half its dependence
on Persian Gulf sources.8 The federal
government has been relatively unsuccessful in achieving even modest telecommuting goals and is now
attempting to legislate a 20 percent
telework rate (http://thomas.loc.
gov/cgi-bin/bdquery/z?d111:h1722:).
Senator Daniel Akaka (D-Hawaii),
a cosponsor of the bill, commented
that, in previous telework hearings,
witnesses reported “agency leadership and management resistance” as
the most significant barriers to telework implementation.9 Companies
such as IBM, Sun Microsystems, and
Cisco have been routinely using telecommuting for half their workforce
for more than a decade, but this experience isn’t common. An ITIF report found that, if only 14 percent of
existing American office jobs were
converted to work-from-home jobs,
the savings would be dramatic: estimated at 136 billion vehicle travel
miles annually in the US by 2020
and 171 billion miles by 2030.10
Green IT savings from telecommuting, for now at least, can only be
left to conjecture because we might
have already achieved many of the
most lucrative opportunities. SucJULY/AUGUST 2009

cess will depend on a combination of
skillful management of offsite employees and improvements in current
security arrangements, in addition to
greater support by public and private
sector senior managers.11

Metrics

Measuring green IT compliance is difficult, and many other approaches besides Energy Star and EPEAT exist. At
the macro level is the United-Nationsapproved standard called the “triple
bottom line” (economic, ecological, and
social outcomes), which is associated
with the global ecological footprint
and has an IT component. By contrast,
the Telecommunications Energy­Efficiency Ratio (TEER) is an equipment-specific metric (www.chloregy.
org/opinion/technology/4882-telecom
munications-energy-efficiency-ratio).
The ITU emphasizes green IT, too, noting that mitigation of IT emissions has a
major multiplier effect: “Although ICTs
account for only around 2.5 percent of
total greenhouse gas emissions, they
have the potential to be used in reducing the other 97.5 percent of emissions
in other sectors” (www.itu.int/themes/
climate/docs/report/08_mitigation.
html). Earlier this year, the EU produced its own detailed policy document, describing a 10-year plan aimed
at “mobilizing information and communication technologies to facilitate
the transition to an energy-efficient,
low-carbon economy.” Noting that ICT
has the responsibility of developing
both new approaches to carbon reduction (enabling) and metrics for success
(quantifying), the plan is a benchmark
for the entire 26-member EU, which
has an aggregate gross domestic product and population larger than that of
the US (http://ec.europa.eu/information
_ s o c ie t y/ac t i v it ie s/s u s t a i n a ble
_growth/docs/com_2009_111/com
2009-111-en.pdf). Viviane Reding, director of the European Commission’s
Information Society and Media group,
gives frequent online lectures on the
importance of IT as a part of govern-

mental efficiency and has specifically singled out green IT initiatives
as a crucial part of overall policy
implementation (http://ec.europa.eu/
commission_barroso/reding/video/
index_en.htm). Metrics can help, but
there are traditional management
concerns, too. One study found that
many companies don’t inform the IT
unit about its electricity bill, resulting in missed opportunities for goalsetting and attention to IT energy
improvements.12

B

ecause green IT is a very small
segment of the aggregate electrical
energy equation, its ecological impact
might not be great overall, but it’s an
integral part of the wider green movement, and many of its manifestations
are significant. Here are some green
IT markers to keep an eye on. First, as

Cisco Systems, Inc. is accepting resumes
for the following position in:

Phoenix, AZ

System Engineer
(Ref#: PHO2)
Provide pre-sales technical and sales support
for account(s) in assigned territory.
Please mail resumes with reference number to
Cisco Systems, Inc., Attn: J51W, 170 W. Tasman
Drive, Mail Stop: SJC 5/1/4, San Jose, CA 95134.
No phone calls please. Must be legally
authorized to work in the U.S. without
sponsorship. EOE.

www.cisco.com
77

Authorized licensed use limited to: Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT. Downloaded on July 31,2025 at 19:25:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Public Policy

Further Reading
Here is a list of Web sites that deal with
green IT issues.
•

•

•

Green Review — frequent updates
on green IT issues and events worldwide; www.thegreenitreview.com
The Green Grid — industry-supported research and commentary
site aimed at data center activity
with reports about design, energy
measurement, and so on; www.
thegreengrid.org
State e-waste information from

the largest single source of hazardous
waste, IT equipment will come under
increasing scrutiny and legislation
because more manufacturers must
become responsible for the additional
cost of equipment disposal after use.
Second, the energy costs associated
with data centers and their servers,
coolers, and so on, as well as workstations and monitors, are becoming
increasingly evident. Energy Star has
already set up data center energy criteria, and the EU is similarly committed
to achieving major green IT goals for
the energy-hungry centers. Third, US
federal procurement regulations are
squeezing contractors to use EPEATapproved monitors and workstations,
which alone should spur the broader
market. Fourth, it’s possible that several large-scale federal energy carbon
offset plans, such as cap-and-trade,
tax credits, and so on, will lead to increased green IT initiatives. Finally, as
mentioned earlier, the great unknown
could be telecommuting because its
energy savings goals can be achieved
only if there is a minor revolution in
how managers operate — a revolution
that the federal government itself is so
far unable to lead.
Cloud computing — the reallocation of processing workloads from
smaller, company-operated facilities
to massive computing warehouses —
is a possible game-changer in green
IT. If it really catches on, many firms
78 		

•

•

electronicstakeback.com — maps,
updates, legislation, and so on; www.
electronicstakeback.com/legislation/
state_legislation.htm
Department of Energy site with data
center success stories; www1.eere.
energy.gov/industry/saveenergynow/
case_studies.html
Energy Star — IT-related reports
from the most significant electrical
efficiency standards organization;
www.energystar.gov/index.cfm?c=
new_specs.enterprise_servers

and government agencies might send
their data center work to Amazon or
Google warehouses. A recent report
cited the example of a global logistics
company that had a choice: spending $4 million for 150 new servers
plus $1 million in annual license
fees or having the same job done by
Amazon’s cloud service for $131,000
(www.portfolio.com/views/columns/
d u a l-p e r s p e c t i v e s/2 0 0 9/0 3/0 9/
Todays-Weather-Report). If cloud
computing’s potential is fully realized — many people still have significant questions about its reliability
and security — and, as more large
customers migrate in that direction,
green IT challenges won’t go away.
They’ll become more concentrated in
very large facilities. Stay tuned.

5.
6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

ment Act of 2009, draft legislation, House
Committee on Science and Technology,
2009; http://democrats.science.house.gov/
Media/File/Commdocs/hearings/2009/
Full/11feb/Electronic%20Waste_Draft%
20Legislaiton.pdf.
E. Royte, Garbage Land: On the Secret
Trail of Trash, Back Bay Books, 2006.
D. Capuccio and L. Craver, “The Data Center Power and Cooling Challenge,” The
Gartner Group, Nov. 2007.
Creating a Green Data Center to Help Reduce Energy Costs and Gain a Competitive Advantage, tech. report, IBM, 2008;
www-935.ibm.com/ser vices/us/cio/outsourcing/gtw03020-usen-01.pdf.
K. Lister and T. Harnish, Undress For Success — The Naked Truth About Working
From Home, John Wiley & Sons, 2009, pp.
237–238.
J. Davidson, “OPM Chief Thinks Telecommuting Has a Nice Ring to It,” Washington
Post, 30 Apr., 2009; www.washingtonpost.
com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/04/29/
AR2009042904440.html.
W. Cox, “Executive Summary: Improving
Quality of Life Through Telecommuting,”
Information for Technology and Innovation Foundation, Jan. 2009; www.itif.org/
files/Telecommuting.pdf.
S. Ruth and I. Chaudhry, “Telework: A Productivity Paradox,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 12, no. 6, 2008, pp. 87–90.
A. Wittmann, “The Cold Green Facts,”
Information Week, 3 Sept. 2007; www.
informationweek.com/news/storage/show
Article.jhtml?articleID=201803326.

References
1. R. Kumar and L. Mieritz, “Conceptualizing
‘Green’ IT and Data Center Power and Cooling Issues,” The Gartner Group, Sept. 2007.
2. J.G. Koomey, “Memo to Skip Laitner of
EPA: Initial Comments on ‘The Internet
Begins with Coal,’” Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Univ. California, 2008;
ht t p://repositor ies.cd lib.org/cgi/v iew
content.cgi?article=6355&context=lbnl.
3. “IT’s Carbon Footprint,” The McKinsey Quarterly’s Chart Focus Newsletter, ­McKinsey & Co., Apr. 2009; www.
mc k i n se yqua r terly.com/newslet ter s/
chartfocus/2009_04.htm.
4. Electronic Waste Research and Developwww.computer.org/internet/

Stephen Ruth is a professor of public policy
at George Mason University. He manages
a grant-supported IT research group, the
International Center for Applied Studies in Information Technology (ICASIT),
which studies contemporary technology
deployment issues and, most recently,
telework comparisons between the public and private sectors. Contact him at
ruth@gmu.edu.
For more information on this or any other
computing topics, please visit the IEEE
Computer Society Digital Library at www.
computer.org/publications/dlib.
IEEE INTERNET COMPUTING

Authorized licensed use limited to: Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT. Downloaded on July 31,2025 at 19:25:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

