Green Mobile Communications
in India: Emerging Technologies
and Challenges
Babji Prasad Chapa* and Gottapu Sasibhushana Rao**

Energy efficiency is an important issue in the proposed next-generation wireless
communications as it severely affects human life on the earth. Two factors have mainly
become an energy concern in the past decade: global warming due to CO2 emission and
sea-level rise. Further, this issue has become a graver concern due to the ever increasing
demand for data rates, spectral efficiency and quality of service combined with massive IoT
communications. Therefore, there is a need for developing green mobile communications
by 2020, which can ensure reduced energy consumption and increased battery life, besides
increased capacity to enable massive deployment of small cell base stations. The proposed
wireless communication network with the above features is referred to as an energy-efficient
green mobile communication (5G). The paper surveys various technologies for realization
of green mobile communication. Various technologies proposed for the realization of 5G
are simultaneous wireless power and information transfer, massive Multiple Input Multiple
Output (MIMO), millimeter waves and beamforming. An analysis has also been carried out
in the case of the proposed massive MIMO antennas and beamforming technique as a case
study of energy-efficient architecture.
Keywords: 5G networks, Energy efficiency, Wireless power, Massive MIMO, Small cells

Introduction
Information and communication technology has experienced tremendous success in
providing broadband wireless services. Till now, revolution in the wireless technologies
focused on improving the network coverage and capacity, with good quality of service
provided to the users. Today, mobile subscribers are almost more than half of the
world population. Due to this, the energy consumption is increasing day by day, which
will cause an increase in the carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions globally, and enforce more
*

Research Scholar, Department of ECE, AU College of Engineering, Andhra University, Visakhapatnam,
Andhra Pradesh, India; and is the corresponding author. E-mail: babjiprasad.ch@gmail.com

* * Senior Professor, Department of ECE, AU College of Engineering, Andhra University, Visakhapatnam,
Andhra Pradesh, India. E-mail: sasigps@gmail.com
© 2020Mobile
IUP. AllCommunications
Rights Reserved.in India:
Green
Emerging Technologies and Challenges

7

and more challenging tasks for network designers and operators. Energy Efficiency
(EE) is one of the concerns in the wireless communication growth paradigm. This is
the main motivation for investigating the techniques which will remarkably improve
the EE of wireless communication systems, thereby minimizing the operational cost
and environmental impact of broadband mobile services. Surveys indicate that the
mobile information and communication technology would produce more than 350
million tons of greenhouse gases per year by 2020 (Etoh et al., 2008). The paper
addresses energy issues in the present cellular communication and provides a survey
of various technologies which will be adopted in the 5G networks to improve the
EE; also, analysis has been carried out in the case of the proposed massive Multiple
Input Multiple Output (MIMO) antennas and beamforming technique.

Development of Cellular Technologies
The first device used for communication using electricity, telegraph, was developed
by S Morse. It was also used for transmission of voice signals. In the mid 1880s, Maxwell
predicted the possibility of wireless energy transmission. Later, it was demonstrated
by Hertz. Telephone was invented by Alexander Graham Bell in 1876. Since then,
wireless communication has been going through different generations every 10 years.

First Generation (1G)
The first-generation (1G) systems came into existence in the early 1980s, which are
analog in nature. These provide data rates up to 2.5 kbps but have several drawbacks
related to security, data transfer and call dropping. Basically, this was the first system
designed for providing better coverage and global connectivity without giving
importance to the energy optimization of the network.

Second Generation
The second-generation (2G) systems were primarily intended for speech along with
power control techniques that gives a constant transmission speed of about 72 kbps
with accepted Quality of Service (QoS). SMS and e-mail are the services provided by
2G. Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM), Interim Standard-95 and Interim
Standard-136 are the major standards in 2G (Santhi, 2003). Because of low power
radio signals, the 2G mobile units have long-lasting battery life. 2.5G is the other
variant of second-generation systems. The framework of 2.5G is almost same as 2G
system. Both packet switching and circuit switching are used in this system. These
systems give transmission rates up to 150 kbps. The dominant technologies in 2.5G
were GPRS, EDGE and CDMA2000. 2G and 2.5G have the same power levels.

Third Generation (3G)
The third-generation (3G) systems provide data rates up to 2.5 Mbps along with
enhanced QoS. The standard technology in 3G is based on Wideband CDMA (WCDMA)
8

The IUP Journal of Telecommunications, Vol. XII, No. 1, 2020

and it is referred to as IMT standard 2000 designated by the ITU. UMTS is one of
the standards provided by 3G, which is a replacement for global system for mobile
communication and standardized by 3GPP (Goldsmith, 2009). Global roaming and
improved voice quality are the additional services provided by 3G systems. The main
drawback of 3G mobile units is that they consume a lot of power than the 2G mobile
handsets.

Fourth Generation
The fourth-generation (4G) wireless systems are revolutionary in broadband mobile
communications and these are successor to the 3G. This is also called long-term
evolution. In this technology, the carriers are generated orthogonally and are
multiplexed using frequency division basis. 4G provides transmission speed up to 1
Gbps for stationary users and 100 Mbps for high mobility users. 4G provides services
like data, voice and multimedia to users whenever and wherever they need with high
transmission speeds as compared to previous generations. Some of the applications
of 4G are DVB, MMS, video chat, HDTV mobile and content TV (Rappaport, 1996).
Some of the emerging standards will improve the coverage area problems and create
much more EE networks (Peters et al., 2009). The major drawback of fourthgeneration systems is the use of cell-specific reference signals which will decrease the
network EE by increasing overhead.

Fifth Generation
The fifth-generation (5G) meets the increasing demand for more transmission speeds.
The present 4G network will soon be replaced by the forthcoming revolution of
mobile network, i.e., 5G network. To meet the increased demand of the network
users, the EE improvement is essential for next-generation networks. The techniques
that are involved in the 5G are device-to-device communications and machine-tomachine communications. The next generation networks will provide even more
transmission speeds and require more power-saving techniques.

Techniques for Improving Energy Efficiency
Cellular generations from 1G to 4G are meant for capacity improvement. These
generations concentrate on how to increase the spectral efficiency of information
that is packed onto the electromagnetic wave. The equipments used in these
technologies are more energy-consuming. This motivates the energy optimization for
the use of wireless devices. The energy consumption must be minimized in order to
have green mobile communication (Feng et al., 2013; and Hossain et al., 2014). The
main objective is to improve EE without compromising on user requirements. The
forthcoming technology will concentrate on spectral efficiency and EE. Both energy
and spectral efficiency are critical for 5G success. Conventional definition for EE is
Green Mobile Communications in India:
Emerging Technologies and Challenges

9

the measure of number of bits transmitted per joule of energy consumed (Wu
et al., 2015). A key design parameter in this regard is the bit-per-joule EE, defined
as:

Energy Efficiency (bits/J) 

Throughput (bits/s)
Power Consumption (J/s)

...(1)

The easiest way to improve EE is deployment of virtualized network architectures,
cloud radio and collaborative radio networks. Some of the EE techniques are discussed
below.

Small Cells
A small cell is a scaled down version of Base Station (BS) which splits the cell site into
a number of smaller pieces, and these pieces are made of picocells, microcells,
femtocells in the indoor/outdoor systems. The major objective of small cells is to
enhance edge data capacity, speed and overall network efficiency of the macro cells.
Figure 1 shows the types of different BSs, from picocell to macrocell.
Figure 1: Base Station Types

Sub-Urban

Urban

Microcell

In building
Picocell

Macrocell

Table 1 shows a comparison of different cell deployments in terms of their cell
radius, output power, number of users allocated and location where it can be used.
EE can be greatly improved with the use inter-carrier frequency techniques in the
small cells (Prasad et al., 2013).
Table 1: Comparison of Different Cell Deployments
Cell Type

Output Power

Cell Radius

Users

Locations

0.001 to 0.25

0.010 to 0.1

1 to 30

Indoor

0.25 to 1

0.1 to 0.2

30 to 100

Indoor/Outdoor

Microcell

1 to 10

0.2 to 2.0

100 to 2,000

Indoor/Outdoor

Macrocell

10 to >50

8 to 30

>2,000

Outdoor

Femtocell
Picocell

10

The IUP Journal of Telecommunications, Vol. XII, No. 1, 2020

Simultaneous Wireless Information and Power Transfer (SWIPT)
In recent times, due to substantial increase in the demand for EE in cellular
communication, there is a lot of attention in combining energy harvesting techniques
with cellular communication system. Wireless power transfer is the forthcoming and
promising technology in cellular systems. In this, nodes can charge their batteries
using electromagnetic energy. Radiative and non-radiative are the techniques involved
in wireless power transfer technology. If power is transferred by magnetic fields
through the inductive coupling between the coil of wires or by electric fields using
the capacitive coupling between metal electrodes, it is non-radiative technique;
whereas if the power is transferred by a beam of electromagnetic radiation, it is
radiative technique. Figure 2 shows the power and information concurrently
transferred to different users from the BS. Strong signals increase the power transfer;
due to this, interference levels also increase. This method is convenient and handy
if sensor nodes are employed or for the futuristic technology used in IoT’s,
where the control signals are utilized for charging the access point. Rectenna is one
of the features utilized for this reason, which transforms electromagnetic energy to
uniform current. This is accomplished by dividing the received signal into two
orthogonal signals; thereby the EE of the system can be improved. SWIPT necessitates
modification in the existing communication system (Huang and Larsson, 2013; and
Krikidis et al., 2014).
Figure 2: Simultaneous Wireless Information and Power Transfer
Information

Power

Massive
MIMO

Mobile 1

Mobile 2

Mobile N

Base Station

Green Mobile Communications in India:
Emerging Technologies and Challenges

11

Massive MIMO
Massive MIMO is a promising technology in order to both increase capacity and
reduce power consumption for 5G systems. MIMO is the most prominent technology
in the fourth-generation systems and is used to improve the spectral efficiency of
the network. MIMO technology provides both multiplexing gain and diversity gain.
Diversity gain can be obtained by transmitting the same signals through various paths
from transmitter to receiver, whereas multiplexing gain can be attained by sending
independent signals in parallel through the spatial channels. Both these are
responsible for the reduction in EE. In the forthcoming generation of networks, a
revised form of MIMO is recommended, where more number of antennas are
deployed at the BS and is referred to as massive MIMO. By using these massive
antennas, the BS is now capable of communicating with multiple subscribers at the
same time in the same frequency spectrum and making it possible to increase the
multiplexing and array gain simultaneously. Hence massive MIMO technology is both
spectrum-efficient and energy-efficient. If normal BS with 1,200 sectoring is used, then
energy will spread out throughout the beam sector, and power is wasted in the region
where the user is not actually located, as shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Radiation Pattern Without Beamforming

Wasted Power

M
O
B

Wasted Power

I
L

Base Station

E
PBS = 1

By increasing the number of antennas and with beamforming, the energy will
focus on the required user equipment without wastage of power. So, the massive
MIMO is energy-efficient technology.
Table 2 shows a comparison between the single antenna and multiple antenna
configurations. If the number of BS transmit antennas increases from 1 to 120, then
the normalized power of the base reduces from 1 to 0.08.
Massive MIMO is a combination of MIMO and beamforming technique. MIMO is
spatially exploiting the complexity of channel by directing energy in different
directions; beamforming is for focusing energy in a required direction. The basic
architecture of massive MIMO is shown in Figure 4.
12

The IUP Journal of Telecommunications, Vol. XII, No. 1, 2020

Table 2: Power Consideration for Massive MIMO Base Station
Number of antennas = 1

Number of user equipments = 1
120 antennas/UE

Number of BS transmit antennas = 1
Normalized output power of antennas

Pant 

120
Pant 

1
Mt2

1
1
Mt

Normalized output power of BS
Ptot 

Mt



i
Pant
1

Ptot 

i 1

Mt

P

i
ant

 0.008

i 1

Figure 4: Massive MIMO
Array of Antennas

U
E

U
E

U
E

U
E

U
E
U
E

U
E

U
E

BS

Green Mobile Communications in India:
Emerging Technologies and Challenges

13

Millimeter Waves
Millimeter waves are presumed to be one of the prominent technologies of fifthgeneration networks. It is assumed to provide solution to the issue of bandwidth
allocation needed for faster delivery of HD video and large multimedia content. The
wireless signals use a higher frequency band in between 30 and 300 GHz, thereby
operating at millimeter wavelength. In the future, the transmission speeds are likely
to rise to multi gigabit per second. However, millimeter waves cause higher path losses
and reduce signal strength and this will lead to restricted communication range.
Because of the small range of wavelength, millimeter waves use spatial multiplexing
techniques for transmission and reception. Massive MIMO and adaptive beamforming
techniques are very crucial in the millimeter range and they provide significant
contribution in the 300 GHz range of frequencies. Employing beamforming to focus
the radiation pattern will assist in increasing the communication range and reduction
in the power consumption can be expected (Chen et al., 2014). High transmission
speeds can be obtained by establishing a direct directional link between the BS and
user. Due to this, signal interference and energy will be reduced. Thus, there will
be an increase in throughput per unit energy in this case and hence EE is expected
to be improved.

Beamforming
This technology is so important for next-generation green mobile networks, which
allows for greater radio signal focusing on specific user devices in high-demand areas.
Essentially, beam-forming improves signal reception and reduces interference. More
antennas have to be used to increase the focus of the beam so that the beam can
be focused on required user with this technology:

 

2d
sin


...(2)

where d is fixed antenna spacing,  is choose direction and  is set phase shift. The
angle where the beam steers from the center to the required user is . This steer
angle  depends on basically two variables, while eventually reduce to single variable.
The first variable, separation between antennas d, is typically expressed in the form
of wavelength /2 and it is one of the standard spacings over antenna arrays.
Therefore, the phase difference between antennas is basically a function of  The
beam can be steered in any direction just by controlling the phase difference between
the antennas is shown in Figure 5.
Table 3 shows the steer angle  for different phase difference values between the
antennas and for antenna spacing /2.
14

The IUP Journal of Telecommunications, Vol. XII, No. 1, 2020

Figure 5: Beamforming Technique
Broadside
To Far Side








Antennas
Phase Shifters
Attenuators

Table 3: Steer Angles for Various Phase Differences Between Antennas
Antenna Spacing, d

Phase Difference
Between the Antennas, 

Steer Angle, 
(Degrees)

/2

30o

9.59

/2

45o

14.47

/2

60

o

19.47

/2

75o

24.62

/2

90

30

/2

120o

41.81

/2

150

56.44

/2

180o

o

o

90

Conclusion
Communication EE presents indeed an alarming restriction in the development and
growth of telecommunication. This paper discusses the growing need and demand
for EE in the next-generation networks. The significance of choosing the appropriate
EE metric and green cellular communication has also been discussed. This paper
provides a brief summary of the work done in the past to increase the EE of wireless
networks. EE techniques, massive MIMO and SWIPT have also been discussed. The
Green Mobile Communications in India:
Emerging Technologies and Challenges

15

region of interest of this paper lies in utilizing beamforming technique for the
forthcoming networks, small cells and their significance in improving EE.&

References
1. Chen L, Jin H, Li H et al. (2014), “An Energy Efficient Implementation of C-RAN
in HetNet”, Proc. IEEE 80th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC Fall), September, Vancouver,
BC, Canada.
2. Etoh M, Ohya T and Nakayama Y (2008), “Energy Consumption Issues on Mobile
Networks Systems”, Proceedings of the International Symposium on Applications
and the Internet, July-August, pp. 365-368, SAINT.
3. Feng D, Jiang C, Lim G et al. (2013), “A Survey of Energy-Efficient Wireless
Communications”, IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 167-178.
4. Goldsmith A (2009), Wireless Communications, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK.
5. Hossain E, Rasti H, Tabassum and Abdelnasser A (2014), “Evolution Toward 5G
Multi-Tier Cellular Wireless Networks: An Interference Management Perspective”,
IEEE Wireless Commun., Vol. 21, No. 3, pp. 118-127.
6. Huang K and Larsson E (2013), “Simultaneous Information and Power Transfer
for Broadband Wireless Systems”, IEEE Trans. Signal Process, Vol. 61, No. 23,
pp. 5972-5986.
7. Krikidis I, Timotheou S, Nikolaou S et al. (2014), “Simultaneous Wireless
Information and Power Transfer in Modern Communication Systems”, IEEE
Commun. Mag., Vol. 52, No. 11, pp. 104-110.
8. Peters S W, Panah A Y, Truong K T and Heath R W (2009), “Relay Architectures
for 3GPP LTE-Advanced”, EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., July, p. 1-4.
9. Prasad A, Tirkkonen O, Lunden P et al. (2013), “Energy-Efficient Inter-Frequency
Small Cell Discovery Techniques for LTE-Advanced Heterogeneous Network
Deployments”, IEEE Commun. Mag., Vol. 51, No. 5, pp. 72-81.
10. Rappaport T S (1996), Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice, Vol. 2,
Prentice-Hall.
11. Santhi K R (2003), “Goals of True Broad Band’s Wireless Next Wave (4G-5G)”, Proc.
IEEE 58th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall), Vol. 4, October, pp. 2317-2321.
12. Wu G, Yang C, Li S and Li G Y (2015), “Recent Advances in Energy-Efficient
Networks and Their Application in 5G Systems”, IEEE Wireless Commun., Vol. 22,
No. 2, pp. 145-151.
Reference # 70J-2020-02-01-01
16

The IUP Journal of Telecommunications, Vol. XII, No. 1, 2020

Copyright of IUP Journal of Telecommunications is the property of IUP Publications and its
content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email
articles for individual use.

