Rebound Effects and ICT: A Review
of the Literature
Cédric Gossart

Abstract This paper presents a critical review of the literature on the rebound
effects generated by information and communication technologies (ICT).
Following a discussion of the types of general rebound, including direct, indirect,
and economy-wide, the literature on ICT-related rebound effects is critically
assessed. The chapter suggests ways of overcoming rebound and lays out promising avenues of research to better understand and tackle rebound effects in ICT.
Keywords Rebound effects

 ICT  Resource efficiency

1 Introduction
Between 1982 and 2012, while final energy intensity in France decreased by one
third, final energy consumption increased by 15 %, from 134 to 154 Mtoe [1]. The
transportation sector also witnessed important energy efficiency gains. For
example, the fuel consumption of a medium-range car dropped from 8.3 to
6.7 l/100 km between 1990 and 2012, and CO2 emissions of new average cars also
dropped from 175 to 124 gCO2/km. In the same period, the mileage per medium
range car remained stable at around 13,000 km/y. These results should have
delivered energy savings to the French economy, but the exact opposite happened:
the final energy consumption of road transportation increased from 32 to 36 Mtoe,
and its CO2 emissions increased by 10 %. Despite energy efficiency improvements, overall energy consumption and pollution increased, notably because the
number of cars increased from 24 to 32 million, providing evidence of a ‘‘rebound
effect.’’ One would not be blamed for questioning, like Herring [2–3], whether
energy efficiency measures do in fact deliver energy savings. As explained in the
C. Gossart (&)
Télécom École de Management, Institut Mines-Télécom, Evry Cedex, France
e-mail: Cedric.Gossart@telecom-em.eu
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
L.M. Hilty and B. Aebischer (eds.), ICT Innovations for Sustainability,
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 310,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09228-7_26

435

436

C. Gossart

next section, information and communication technologies (ICT) are often used to
improve energy efficiency but are subject to rebound effects. Large public and
private investments are made every year to leverage ICT to improve energy
consumption and other types of efficiency such as labor productivity. But if the
rebound effects associated with ICT are high, those gains will be absorbed and the
environmentally-driven investments will fail to meet their objectives.
The purpose of this paper is to clarify the rebound effects related to ICT,
including energy-related effects. To this end, Sect. 2 defines rebound effects, and
Sect. 3 presents the rebound effects that are associated with ICT. The conclusion
offers some ways for avoiding ICT-related rebound effects and points to future
lines of research.

2 What are Rebound Effects?
2.1 Definitions
In the 19th century, the industrial revolution supported England’s economic wealth
and political power. Domestic coal was key to maintaining this power and there
were great fears regarding the growing scarcity of this cheap local fuel. England
was consuming massive amounts of coal, and much of it was wasted by inefficient
mining and processing. To prevent this core resource from being prematurely
exhausted, engineers invented solutions to reduce coal waste by improving mining
and processing efficiency. Would English coal resources last longer thanks to these
energy efficiency innovations? A negative answer seldom heard at the time was
voiced in a book entitled The Coal Question, in which the economist William
Stanley Jevons claimed in that ‘‘technological efficiency gains (…) actually
increased the overall consumption of coal, iron, and other resources, rather than
saving them’’ [4, p. 9]. In his formulation of the ‘‘Jevons’ paradox,’’ Jevons
demonstrated that contrary to their primary objective, efficiency policies were
actually counterproductive and were leading to resource overuse [5]. Jevons
believed that ‘‘the present generations are allowed to use intensively ore resources
to the extent they transform them in wealth for future generations’’ [6, p. 100].
It was more than a century before energy economists coined the expression
‘‘rebound effect’’ to characterize the negative side effects of efficiency policies and
strategies that ended up taking back the environmental gains they had permitted.
For them, the term ‘‘rebound effect’’ dates back to Khazzoom [7] and characterizes
‘‘improvements in the technical efficiency of energy use’’ that had a smaller
energy-saving effect than predicted by engineers [8]. Indeed, efficiency gains
achieved when manufacturing a product or providing a service reduce their costs.
As a consequence, its price decreases and demand for it increases. If efficiency
gains are indeed reported at the micro level of single products, the macroeconomic
picture suggests that more resources have actually been used, for example because
the lower price of single products has boosted their sales or because the more

Rebound Effects and ICT: A Review of the Literature

437

efficient single product has been used very intensively. For example, a company
using energy-efficient servers will reduce its data storage costs, which will enable
it to buy more servers and to use them more intensively, directly impacting its
electricity bill. In analyzing the relationships between ICT and the environment,
Hilty emphasizes that they can enable positive environmental changes but also
negatives ones [9]. Based on an OECD report [10], the author distinguishes three
levels of effects of ICT on the environment: 1st order effects (direct effects of ICT
caused by their physical production, use, and disposal), 2nd order effects (impacts
of ICT on other sectors), and 3rd order effects (structural ones), which include
rebound effects.
Rebound effects have also been discussed in other disciplines such as psychology, as in the case of ‘‘stereotype rebound.’’1 Another psychological rebound
effect occurs when ecotechnologies make consumers feel good and encourage
increased consumption of greener products [12]. From an economic perspective,
consumers buy a given product because it ‘‘maximizes his/her utility’’: it serves a
purpose or need, which makes the consumer happy and satisfied for a given
amount of money. The various needs that people seek to satisfy have been
described in a simple manner by Maslow’s ‘‘hierarchy of needs,’’ which represents
people’s needs in a pyramid starting with basic needs at the bottom: physiological
needs, safety needs, love and belonging, esteem, self-actualization. Once the first
two basic needs have been satisfied, people seek to satisfy more elaborate ones
such as the need to belong to a community or to be esteemed by their peers.
Consuming greener products can contribute to these needs because it makes
individuals feel that they belong to a community of people who care about the
environment, and that they are esteemed by other people because they adopt
responsible consumption patterns.

2.2 Categories of Rebound Effects
In a seminal paper in which he recalls the history of the concept and clarifies its
categories, Sorrell explains the three categories of energy-related rebound effects
[8], which were already present in Jevons’ book (as underlined by Missemer [6]).
They are ‘‘typically expressed as the percentage of potential savings taken back
from the maximum efficiency improvement expected’’ [12, p. 6].
The first category includes direct rebound effects, which have been extensively
analyzed by economic theory [13–15]. In this case, lower energy cost induces price
reductions that trigger an increase in the demand for the cheaper good (e.g. if
washing machines need less power, consumers can afford to wash more

1

‘‘Stereotype rebound refers to the ironic finding that active efforts to avoid thinking about
people in a stereotypical manner can backfire and subsequently lead to increased stereotypical
thinking and prejudiced behavior.’’ [11, p. 111].

438

C. Gossart

frequently). From earlier work, Sorrell cites the example of the Bessemer process,
which enabled metallurgical companies to achieve their greatest energy savings of
all times, while at the same time leading to large increases in steel demand that
would not have been seen before that innovation [8]. Here, the money saved thanks
to energy efficiency gains was reallocated to consume more of the same product.
For example, throughout the second half of the 20th century, in the US manufacturing industry there is evidence of a 24 % rebound effect, meaning that energy
efficiency gains had gone hand in hand with a 24 % increase in energy demand
[16]. It is hard to compare evaluations of rebound effects since they vary with the
methodology and data employed. Hence, some authors disagree with Jevons’
standpoint, claiming that rebound effects have been small over the 1970s and
1980s, and that during this period ‘‘most of the improvements in energy efficiencies led to reductions in energy intensities’’ [17, p. 367]. Others underline that
if total resource consumption grows while efficiency improves it ‘‘does not necessarily demonstrate that resource consumption grows because of improvements in
efficiency’’ [18, p. 21]. However, Bentzen suggests an order of magnitude for the
rebound effect that ranges between 0 and 50 % in relation to consumers, with a
smaller effect for firms [16]. At the upper margin, this would imply that if technological energy efficiency gains are predicted to be 100 MW by engineers, they
are actually only 50 MW. Half of the expected energy savings are absorbed by
rebound effects. The author also reports a study showing that in the Netherlands,
up to 30 % of projected efficiency gains could be absorbed by an increased
demand for energy services [13]. Although these estimates are not very precise and
vary across time, countries or sectors, they may be useful to firms and policy
makers as an indication of how much they should reduce their expectations of the
savings generated by energy efficiency measures. For example, in calculating the
return on investment of an insulation program, a government agency could use a
discount rate of 30 % to account for potential rebound effects in order to obtain
more realistic energy saving figures. This rate would vary across sectors; for
example, rebound effect estimates in the UK industrial sector are about 15 %, and
they range between 20 and 60 % for US energy-intensive sectors [18].
The second category concerns indirect rebound effects: When a resource is used
more efficiently and its price goes down, it induces the consumption of other
commodities (e.g., consumers buy extra DVD players for the money they saved
due to an energy-efficient product). In this case, households use their increased
remaining income to buy other energy-consuming products or services. For
example, if a family saved money by insulating its apartment, it might use the
savings to fly to a remote holiday location instead of taking the train to a closer
one. Overall, the financial gains from insulation-driven energy savings would not
generate environmental benefits.
A third category concerns economy-wide rebound effects, which appear when
declining energy prices induce a reduction in the prices of intermediate and final
goods throughout the economy and cause structural changes in production patterns
and consumption habits. For example, cheaper gasoline enables people to live
further away from their workplace by making it less expensive to drive longer

Rebound Effects and ICT: A Review of the Literature

439

distances to work. These effects are the aggregated result of both direct and
indirect rebound effects and can be expressed as a ‘‘percentage of the expected
energy savings from an energy-efficiency improvement’’ [8, p. 1457]. If this
percentage reaches 100 %, it means that ‘‘the expected energy savings are entirely
offset, leading to zero net savings for the economy as a whole’’ (ibid.). These
savings ‘‘backfire’’ when the rebound exceeds 100 %, which means that the overall
energy consumption actually increases after energy saving measures (ibid.).
The rebound effects defined here refer to ‘‘pure’’ energy efficiency gains; i.e.,
energy efficiency productivity, with no gains in other resource productivities and
no gains in labor and/or capital productivity (including convenience). One must be
careful speaking of a rebound effect in these cases. In practice, technological
change generally produces a bundle of improvements, of which the energy efficiency gain is just one such improvement. Indeed, such a change can become so
popular that it produces other improvements that can be considered ‘‘collateral
benefits.’’ Hence, these benefits can give the demand for the improved technology
a huge boost and lead to economy-wide rebound effects higher than 100 %. As a
consequence, a technology that leads to efficiency gains on the micro level might
actually lead to efficiency losses on the macro level. In order to avoid this confusion, a distinction can be made between pure energy efficiency improvements
and technological changes that include energy efficiency improvements.

3 Rebound Effects and ICT
3.1 ICT and Efficiency
ICT include both hardware and software technologies. Historically, they are
among the most prominent general purpose technologies, such as steam, electricity, and internal combustion, since they generate wide-ranging impacts across
all sectors, including economic, social, and environmental effects [19–20]. General
purpose technologies are pervasive (spreading to most sectors), improve over time,
spawn innovation (making it easier to invent and produce new products or processes), and continually lower costs for their users [21]. Therefore, the efficiency
gains enabled by ICT diffuse across all sectors, as do their related rebound effects.
There are many ways in which ICT can contribute to energy efficiency [22]. They
can reduce their own energy consumption, enable energy savings in other sectors
such as buildings, transportation, and lighting control, contribute to energy saving
awareness, and so on. Consequently, they are the focus of ad hoc policies that seek
to support these contributions, such as the European energy efficiency plan [23] or
the Smart 2020 initiative [24]. The former does not mention rebound effects, but
the latter underlines that in the case of ICT, ‘‘prevention of the rebound effect
requires an emission-constraining framework,’’ suggesting that energy efficiency
technologies alone are not enough to foster energy savings [24, p. 2].

440

C. Gossart

In order to avoid rebound effects that would absorb the positive contributions of
ICT to energy savings, rebound effects related to ICT must be identified and
evaluated. Unfortunately, few studies have measured rebound effects related to
ICT. For example, Energy Policy’s 2014 special issue on ‘‘Energy efficiency for a
more sustainable world’’ does not contain a single paper on rebound effects, and
the term is not even mentioned in its editorial [25]. A study on Korea even shows
that when they are not geared towards reducing energy consumption, ICT
investments can contribute to increased electricity intensity, because they induce
the replacement of less labor-intensive inputs with more electricity-intensive ones
[26]. This is consistent with Binswanger who argued that when production costs
are dominated by wages and energy prices are low, labor will tend to be replaced
by machines [27]. Since machines usually consume more energy than human
workers doing the same task, low energy prices will encourage increases of firms’
energy consumption. Sorrell argues that this is also the case with household
appliances such as washing machines or dishwashers [28]. It might also be true for
ICT that replaces manpower, as in the case of electronic messaging that partly
substitutes for written letters sent by mail. The comparison of traditional paperbased media with electronic media with regard to sustainability is discussed in
detail in the chapter by Coroama et al. [29] in this volume.

3.2 Direct Rebound Effects
Direct rebound effects appear when technological change enables an improvement
in the efficiency with which some output can be produced from a resource, whose
demand then increases as prices go down, thereby absorbing the resources saved
by efficiency gains. As a consequence, more of the same resource is consumed.
In ICT, the optimized output is information: Moore’s law formalized efficiency
gains enabled by technological change in microprocessors. This generated rebound
effects related to key resources such as time and raw materials. For example, since
microprocessors are getting continuously smaller, each of them requires less
material to be built [9]. But as a consequence, their prices drop, their demand
explodes, and new models quickly offset slower ones. This contributes to the
obsolescence of computers, for example, since only new ones are powerful enough
to host heavier operating systems. Many users would notwithstanding have been
satisfied with a PC fitted out with an older processor, since they do not need
quadruple core processors to write emails and surf on the Internet. Because of
efficiency gains at the level of ICT components, ICT products are made obsolete,
which wastes the resources that could have been saved thanks to these efficiency
gains. In the end, consumers find themselves with over-equipped machines whose
processors remain in a ‘‘busy waiting’’ state most of the time [9]. The historical
development of the power consumption by ICT components is discussed in detail
in the chapters by Aebischer and Hilty [30] and Kaeslin [31] in this volume.

Rebound Effects and ICT: A Review of the Literature

441

Moreover, even if a product is small its energy intensity is often higher than that
of larger products such as cars or refrigerators [32]. And this is likely to worsen
with ubiquitous computing that will connect a multitude of objects to the Internet
such as household appliances, wearable devices, and other smart labels, since this
makes intensive use of network infrastructures by automatically generating data
transfer [33]. New cars will also contribute to information overload, since ‘‘highend functions like autonomous driving or driver assistance systems are likely to
have even higher requirements for data throughput and quality’’ [34, p. 281].
Rebound effects caused by ICT miniaturization are exemplified by the case of
Switzerland, where between 1990 and 2005 the average physical mass of a mobile
phone was reduced by a factor of 4.4, while the total mass of all phones in Switzerland
increased by a factor of eight, because the number of users exploded. This is an
example of what has been termed the ‘‘miniaturization paradox’’ [9]. The underlying
mechanism here may be that while ICT shrinks, MIPS per dollar increase even faster:
‘‘processing power is getting cheaper faster than it is getting smaller!’’ [9, p. 95]. One
might argue that smaller devices require smaller batteries, yet this type of efficiency
gain might be offset because devices multiply (pervasive computing enables a large
number of components to be used in parallel), but also because those devices are
never turned off and use energy-consuming Internet services. Another example of
direct rebound effects caused by miniaturization is small RFID readers, which enable
wireless short-range communication. As their price declines they multiply, which
‘‘will result in a growing stock of always-on radio transmitters whose transmitting
power of up to 2 W must be powered by mains adaptors’’ [33, p. 835].
Miniaturization also helped increase data centers’ efficiency, enabling servers to
grow in size and functionality. Such efficiency gains, also achieved through virtualization,2 helped reduce the costs of information storage and enabled the
deployment of cloud services, which permitted multipoint information access. As a
consequence, demand for data storage space skyrocketed: in 2011, all recorded
data in the world amounted to 1.8 ZB (1.8 9 1021 bytes) [35], and from 1986 to
2007 worldwide computing capacity grew five times faster than economic growth
[36]. These developments, largely enabled by miniaturization, required a lot of
energy. Indeed, ‘‘A modern supercomputer usually consumes between 4 and
6 MW—enough electricity to supply something like 5,000 homes’’ [37, p. 50].
Finally, direct rebound effects were also identified by archivists. Confronted
with increasingly large collections, they had to use increasingly sophisticated
archival practices and technologies, which eventually led to higher costs in terms
of time and resources. For example, archiving innovations did enable repositories
to solve their backlog problem. But ‘‘once this newly found efficiency has been put
into practice, it follows that the repository will seek out even more acquisitions to
further its mission as a collecting repository and the new efficiency would actually
cause an overall increase in the holdings of a repository’’ [38, p. 44].

2

Virtualization enables one server to host multiple virtual servers by using computing resources
that are not being used at their maximum capacity.

442

C. Gossart

3.3 Indirect Rebound Effects
Indirect rebound effects appear when a resource is used more efficiently and the
prices of the goods or services produced from this resource go down, which
induces an increase in the consumption of other resources. Because ICT are
general purpose technologies, this type of rebound is particularly documented for
several sectors where ‘‘savings from efficiency cost reductions enable more
income to be spent on other products and services’’ [12, p. 6]. As a consequence,
more of other resources is consumed.
In the area of e-learning, Herring and Roy have studied the environmental
impacts of three higher education delivery systems [39]. They concluded that
‘‘electronic delivery does not result in a reduction in energy or CO2 emissions
compared to print-based distance learning, due to rebound effects, e.g. in use of
computers and home heating.’’ (ibid., p. 525) As for Caird et al., their study of 30
higher education courses in campus-based and distance education systems in 15
UK institutions revealed that, despite rebound effects, online teaching did lead to
dematerialization [40].
Because it uses ICT intensively, telework is also subject to rebound effects. For
example, telework can also lead to longer commutes when physical presence in
the office is required, since employees might decide to live further away from
their workplaces if they know that they will be able to telework. According to
Hoogeveen and Reijnders, ‘‘the indirect effects associated with increased buying
power and the rebound effect on transportation following from freed travel time
greatly exceeded direct energy efficiency gains’’ [41, p. 542].
Other indirect rebound effects can occur with e-commerce. But although some
authors mention rebound effects as one of the side-effects of e-commerce, they do
not mention any evaluation [42–43]. Only one of them argues that ‘‘teleshopping
generates additional delivery transport’’ [44, p. 296].
In the case of transportation, Hilty et al. see strong rebound effects ‘‘whenever
ICT applications lead to time or cost savings for transport’’ [45, p. 1618]. For
example, ICT can help drivers find a parking place more quickly [46, 47].
Although this avoids wasting gasoline, it also makes it easier for people to use
their car in the city and might increase overall traffic in the long run. The same
consequence can ensue from ICT-based traffic management systems that reduce
traffic jams. Fluidifying traffic might provide incentives for non-drivers to start
using a car because it is less time-consuming and tiring to do so.
Indirect rebound effects have also been observed in relation to ICT services that
seek to reduce transportation. For example, in the cases of teleshopping, telecommuting and teleconferencing ‘‘a substantial part of the transport savings are
nullified by increased transport for other purposes such as shopping and increased
transport by other family members’’ [48, p. 132]. Case studies suggest that the
highest rebound is found in Denmark (73 %): although 105 km could be saved in
weekly commuting, 77 extra kilometers were driven. In the Netherlands, 42 extra
kilometers were driven compared to 98 saved (hence a 43 % rebound effect). The

Rebound Effects and ICT: A Review of the Literature

443

lowest rebound effects were found in Italy (14 %, 242 km saved vs. 33 km extra)
and Germany (19 %, 283 km saved vs. 53 km extra).
In the logistics sector, electronic vehicle management systems are supposed to
improve capacity utilization. Studying their impact on the load factor of heavy
trucks, authors find evidence of a rebound effect on fronthaul movements, measured by a reduction of the load factor by about 8 % [49].
Other indirect rebound effects related to ICT are plausible, although they have
not been empirically studied thus far. Examples are those related to information
and knowledge. Since ICT enable more efficient ways of handling information,
‘‘individual efforts to access and exchange information is lower than before’’
[9, p. 91]. This decreases companies’ internal price of information work, and
increases demand for information, causing people to waste time filing reports. This
increased efficiency of distributing information also benefits researchers: thanks to
online databases, the number of journal articles has boomed. For example, it was
estimated that by the end of 2008 about 50 million articles had been published in
the world [50]. Digital technologies also eased the creation of journals, including
open access ones, making it harder for researchers to follow up scientific discoveries. It even impacted academic evaluation procedures: ‘‘The Internet has not
only reduced the cost and effort of conducting peer review through highly automated Web-based management systems, it has provided a great deal of flexibility
in how peer review can be conducted’’ [51]. This phenomenon has gone hand in
hand with the diffusion of procedures to evaluate researchers based on the quality
and number of publications. Studies show that when such measures are put in
place, the impact factor decreases [52], for example because instead of publishing
one single paper in a very good journal with a longer evaluation process,
researchers tend to send several papers to journals with shorter publishing times
but lower impact factors. As a consequence of this overflow of knowledge diffusion, although the efficiency of carrying out research has increased tremendously
it has become more difficult to assimilate knowledge because there is so much of
it. Indeed, ‘‘a growing number of available and potentially interesting goods and
pieces of information shortens the span of time that can be devoted to each
particular object,’’ and as a consequence ‘‘the amount of time we can allot to the
dutiful perusal of an academic journal decreases in lockstep with the increase in
the number of relevant journals’’ [53, p. 125]. To conclude on information-related
rebound effects, as Hilty puts it: ‘‘Acceleration is certainly the most significant
effect of ICT, the very heart of its potential for societal change’’ [9, p. 69]. Within
companies, ICT enabled people to process information more efficiently, but at the
same time ‘‘the demand for internal reporting has increased with the development
of IT infrastructure in many organizations to a degree that affects the productivity
of the organization’’ [54, p. 27]. Paradoxically, ‘‘although we constantly save time
by using better and speedier technology, in the end we do not have more time than
before, even less perhaps’’ [55, p. 295]. Hilty conducted an experiment on the use
of PCs in order to understand whether new versions of operating systems had
generated rebound effects. He concluded that ‘‘changing over to a faster computer

444

C. Gossart

running newer software does not necessarily lead to higher work efficiency’’
[9, p. 89]. This can be explained by new functionalities added by software
developers, who tend to overlook software efficiency, and by ‘‘software bloating.’’
Besides, ‘‘technological change of a time-saving nature can have a large influence
on energy use as many time-saving devices (for example, faster modes of transport) require an increase in energy consumption that is frequently reinforced by a
‘rebound effect with respect to time’’’ [27, p. 119].

3.4 Economy-Wide Rebound Effects
Economy-wide rebound effects appear when declining costs of a key resource
induce a reduction in the prices of intermediate and final goods throughout the
economy, and cause structural changes in production patterns and consumption
habits.
Unfortunately, to our knowledge no study has sought to evaluate those effects in
the case of ICT. An interesting discussion in relation to the economy-wide rebound
effects caused by ICT is proposed by Sorrell [8]. In a critical assessment of the
work of Brookes and Saunders, he suggests that they do not ‘‘distinguish the
energy-efficiency improvements associated with general purpose technologies and
other forms of energy-efficiency improvements’’ [10, p. 1467]. According to
Sorrell, economy-wide rebound effects are likely to be large in the case of energy
efficiency improvements associated with general purpose technologies. On the
other hand, for technologies with smaller economy-wide effects, ‘‘Jevons’ Paradox
seems less likely to hold,’’ as in the case of dedicated energy-efficiency technologies (ibid.). Therefore, if ICT are indeed energy-efficiency technologies, because
they are general purpose technologies their environmental benefits are likely to be
absorbed by economy-wide rebound effects.
Finally, as a suggestion for future research we would like to propose a new type
of economy-wide rebound effect that has not been investigated yet. As general
purpose technologies, ICT have had positive economic impacts in many economic
sectors. The diffusion of ICT has also taken place in the financial sector. Without
ICT world financial markets would not be interconnected and speculative activities
such as high frequency trading would hardly be possible. The diffusion of ICT in
the financial sector is having economy-wide effects that can offset the economic
benefits of ICT. For example, ICT contribute to the financialization of our economies that deters innovation [56], including environmental innovation {Bohl 2013
#3227}. Given their importance in the financial sector, ICT also played a role in
the financial crisis, which according to some estimates caused economic losses of
‘‘at least a year’s worth of U.S. economic output’’ (more than 14,000 billion
dollars) [57]. We can thus argue that the economic benefits of ICT are offset by the
losses caused by their diffusion in the financial sector, which represents an
economy-wide rebound effect.

Rebound Effects and ICT: A Review of the Literature

445

4 Conclusion
In this paper we have discussed the rebound effects related to ICT. Although the
number of academic papers evaluating rebound effects in other sectors such as
transportation or buildings has increased greatly over the past few years, the ICT
sector remains underinvestigated. This is despite the fact that existing papers all
point out that ICT are subject to important rebound effects of all kinds (energy,
time, and knowledge-related), notably because ICT are general purpose technologies that can generate high resource savings throughout the entire economy and
society. Although more research is needed to evaluate those rebound effects, some
lessons can be learned about how to overcome them.
First, efficiency strategies should not rely exclusively on technological change.
As Hilty puts it: ‘‘In general terms, an efficiency strategy must always be
accompanied by a sufficiency strategy’’ [9, p. 72]. Other authors have also argued
in favor of such behavioral changes on the consumer side [58–61]. Also, general
awareness of rebound effects should be increased [62], including limitations of the
concept, especially at the macro level. Van den Bergh suggests carrying out
systematic ‘‘energy/environmental rebound assessments’’ of important energy
conservation projects or strategies, just as any large investment project requires an
environmental impact assessment [63]. Integrating rebound effects in energy
efficiency evaluations is one solution [64], and integrating them in life cycle
assessments is another [65], as has been attempted by Andersen for renewable
energy [18]. Finally, efficiency evaluations need to stop focusing on individual
products and look at the broader picture, even if the difficulty of finding data makes
this challenging. In the case of spam, massive information pollution due to low
email costs, Mike Berners-Lee (the brother of Tim who founded the World Wide
Web) suggests taxing by one cent per email, since in terms of energy intensity
‘‘e-mail is great individually, but it’s terrible in the aggregate because there’s so
much of it’’ [66, p. 65]. Combining technological efficiency measures with pollution capping would ‘‘create incentives that would spur demand-side efficiencies
to match those already realized on the supply side’’ (ibid.). Besides, policies and
strategies could be developed to support energy-aware ICT by design, as suggested
by Ricciardi et al. for the Internet [67]. This would enable ICT to control for their
energy impacts from the design stage, in a similar fashion to what has been done
with ‘‘privacy-by-design’’ technologies [68].
Beyond the technicality of their evaluation, rebound effects should be perceived
as indicators of destructive contradictions in our socioeconomic systems. Studying
them enables us to better understand these contradictions, and to imagine means to
overcome them. Some argue that if they are controlled, technologies could support
the absolute decoupling between increased wellbeing and worsening ecological
impacts [63]. Otherwise, only partial decoupling might be achieved, at best [69].
Solutions to combat rebound effects are outside the scope of this chapter. Yet we can
sense that they require profound changes in our production systems and consumption patterns in order to achieve a sustainable transition of human societies.

