Semiconductor Technology
and the Energy Efficiency of ICT
Hubert Kaeslin

Abstract CMOS circuits have been the workhorse of ICT for 40 years. Due to the
unique scaling property of this technology, energy efficiency has enormously
improved during that time, notably by lowering the supply voltage from the longtime standard of 5 to 1 V and less. As the era of ‘‘happy scaling’’ has come to an
end, progress becomes increasingly difficult and techniques beyond 2D size
reductions have come into play. A superior and viable alternative to CMOS has yet
to be found.

1 Why Has CMOS Become the Sole Technology
for Information Processing?
CMOS (complementary metal oxide semiconductor) circuits totally dominate
information processing and memory devices (RAM) today, both for professional
ICT and consumer products. Also, solid-state disks assembled from flash-type
memory chips are currently making ever deeper inroads into permanent mass
storage, the traditional realm of magnetic disks. To fully understand that situation,
we begin this review with a brief account of why CMOS technology displaced all
contenders.
Initially a slow alternative to TTL, ECL, GaAs and other circuit technologies,
CMOS had two unique and highly valuable traits:
1. n- and p-channel MOSFETs (metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors)
are manufactured side-by-side on the same silicon chip and work together as
pairs in each logic gate. As these complementary switches turn ‘‘on’’ and ‘‘off’’
in an alternating fashion, supply current dropped to zero once a circuit had
settled to a steady state. As a consequence, power dissipation was directly
H. Kaeslin (&)
Microelectronics Design Center, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
e-mail: kaeslin@ee.ethz.ch
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
L.M. Hilty and B. Aebischer (eds.), ICT Innovations for Sustainability,
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 310,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09228-7_5

105

106

H. Kaeslin

proportional to the switching activities in a circuit or, in other words, to the
overall computational burden. This was in stark contrast to competing circuit
technologies that draw significant amounts of DC current even when idle.
2. Almost all figures of merit of a circuit benefited from smaller layout geometries. Over the past 40 years, transistors, interconnect lines, and the separations
between them have been downsized by a factor of approximately 1.4 with each
new process generation. Each such shrink improved
•
•
•
•
•

the number of transistors per area,
the switching speed and, hence, the attainable clock frequency,
the computational performance and the storage capacity,
the energy dissipated per switching event, and
the unit costs per function (transistor, logic gate, computing operation,
memory bit, etc.).

The first person to recognize the tremendous potential of CMOS scaling was
Robert Dennard, who in 1974 formulated a set of rules that involved both geometrical and electrical quantities. Scaling is what has made it possible to serve
ever higher computational and storage needs over several decades. Dennard
scaling can indeed be understood as the explanation behind Moore’s law. To this
day, the ability to offer better performance at lower unit costs constitutes the
competitive advantage that drives the semiconductor industry and that justifies
ever larger investments. Established companies and start-ups eagerly picked up on
the new possibilities, offering ever more sophisticated products, software applications, and services to the public.
Watch circuits, in which speed is immaterial and zero standby power crucial,
were in fact among the earliest CMOS applications before the technology entered
embedded computing in the form of microprocessors for its robustness, low power,
and—at the time—relative simplicity. Affordable CMOS microprocessors later
helped create the home computer, a product and a market that had not existed
before and that paved the way to personal computing. Gaining in density and
performance with each new process generation, CMOS Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) circuits gradually moved up the ladder and eventually made their
way into supercomputers. Integrating many millions of logic gates on a single
silicon microchip ultimately proved more useful than squeezing the maximum
operating frequency out of a handful of gates manufactured using a fancy
technology.
Over the same time frame, VLSI chips also enabled mobile computing,
broadband and digital wireless telecommunication, handheld music players and
GPS devices, smartphones, download services, video streaming, Internet shopping,
social networks, and all those applications that we see today.
As long as a typical processor dissipated only a few watts due to its relatively
modest transistor count and operating frequency, VLSI designers had no reason to
pay much attention to energy efficiency. Cost and performance invariably came
first, and much the same applied to memory chips. This attitude radically changed
in the 1990s with the advent of mobile computing which turned battery run time

Semiconductor Technology and the Energy Efficiency of ICT

107

voltage
constant-field scaling

constant-voltage scaling
[V]
5

DVFS & adaptive threshold control

3.0μm 2.0μm 1.5μm 1.0μm 0.6μm 0.5μm

nominal supply voltage

4
Udd −Uth
above-threshold
gate drive voltage

3
2

high-speed
operation

0.35μm

typical threshold voltage
0.25μm

low-voltage
low-leakage
operation

?

180nm
130nm 90nm

1

65nm

45nm 32nm

22nm

16nm

11nm
time

0
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

[A.D.]

Fig. 1 Evolution of CMOS supply and threshold voltages. Source [1]

into a key issue. Mains-operated computers also ran into power limitations due to
the problems associated with carrying away the heat produced by high-performance CPUs and graphic processors. This is because thermal flows in excess of
100–120 W drive up the costs for heat sinks, cooling fans, heat pipes, and related
equipment to uneconomical heights. As the energy dissipated by a CMOS circuit
for a given computation grows with the supply voltage squared, devising circuits
and architectures that could provide the same level of performance from a lower
voltage was a natural choice; see Fig. 1. Suspending the clock to inactive circuit
blocks, known as clock gating, was an important innovation, but there were many
others such as input silencing, delay balancing, and dynamic back biasing.
Over many product generations, the combined efforts of scaling and improved
engineering led to a reduction in the amount of energy spent on a given computing
or storage operation by several orders of magnitude. Yet, the explosion of new ICT
products and services and their general adoption simply outpaced those efficiency
gains. Today, the primary goal of VLSI design is to provide more computing
performance and more storage capacity within the current power and energy
budgets.

2 Where Does CMOS Technology Stand Today?
Dennard scaling, where geometric shrinking is accompanied by a proportional
reduction of the supply voltage to maintain a constant electric field, came to an end
around 2004, at the same time as the Gigahertz race; see Figs. 1 and 2. This is
because to maintain the operating speed, MOSFET threshold voltages must be
scaled down along with the supply voltage. Unfortunately, the lower its threshold
voltage, the more a MOSFET tends to leak when turned off. To make things worse,
the dependency is inherently exponential as any further reduction of a mere
70–100 mV inflates the sub-threshold current by a factor of 10. And to complicate

108

H. Kaeslin
10,000,000
1,000,000

Transistors per chip

100,000

Number of transistors (thousands)
Relative performance
Clock speed (MHz)
Power type (W)
Number of cores/chip

10,000
1,000
100
10
1
0
1985

1990

1995
2000
Year of introduction

2005

2010

Fig. 2 Transistors, frequency, power, performance, and processor cores over time. The original
Moore’s law projection of increasing transistors per chip remains unabated even as performance
has stalled. Source [2]

matters further, leakage is highly dependent on temperature and subject to
important variations from the fabrication process. All this, in conjunction with the
billions of potential leakage paths present in any complex VLSI chip, currently
prevents industry from generally adopting core supply voltages much below 0.8 V.
Instead, supply and threshold voltages are chosen so as to balance dynamic and
static power in search of the maximum overall energy efficiency.
As a collateral damage, advanced high-performance VLSI technologies have
lost the original CMOS virtue of zero or close-to-zero quiescent current. A circuit
technique known as power gating had to be introduced to electrically disconnect
temporarily inactive circuit blocks from the supply voltage. ‘‘Dark silicon’’ is a
buzzword coined to describe the growing gap between the number of logic gates
that can be manufactured on a chip with each process generation and the number
one can actually afford to operate simultaneously without exceeding the thermal
envelope.
As Dennard scaling ran out of steam, semiconductor technologists began to
resort to low-[r inter-level dielectrics, copper interconnect (instead of aluminum),
crystal straining, high-[r metal gate (HKMG) stacks, silicon on insulator (SOI)
fabrication, and other alternative approaches. The finFET—announced in 2011 and
referred to as ‘‘tri-gate transistor’’ by Intel—significantly improved current control
by allowing the gate field to impinge on the conducting channel from two or even
three sides (instead of just one as in planar devices; compare Fig. 3a, c). This has
made it possible to reduce voltage levels from 1.0 to 0.8 V, but necessitated a total
redesign of the MOSFET’s spatial arrangement and manufacturing steps [3]. The
ultimate stage of development in this direction would be the ‘‘gate-all-around
FET’’ where an annular gate completely surrounds a silicon nanowire; see Fig. 3d.

Semiconductor Technology and the Energy Efficiency of ICT

(a)

field acts on channel
from 1 side

109

G
S

D

n+

n+

p-

gate dielectric

current flow

technological
evolution

(b)
S

from 3 sides

(c)

G

from 2 sides

gate yoke
fin,
p-doped
G
under yoke
S

D

(d)

n+

n+

S

from 4 sides
G

D

D

?
n+

nanowire,
p-doped
in passage

n+

n+

n+

pgate dielectric

gate dielectric

gate dielectric

Fig. 3 Topological options for field-effect devices. Fully depleted n-channel MOSFET (a),
planar double-gate MOSFET (b), fin-FET (c), and nanowire gate-all-around transistor
(d) (simplified). Source [1]

Samples have been demonstrated in the laboratory, but the industrial viability is
yet to be proven.
Circuit and architecture designers also continue to develop innovative ideas
including multiple sleep and power saving modes, dynamic voltage and frequency
scaling (DVFS), heterogeneous multicore architectures, and approximate/inexact/
probabilistic computing. However, as the low hanging fruits have been harvested,
alternative techniques tend to suffer from diminishing returns.

3 What Are the Perspectives?
Now at the 22 nm generation, CMOS technology is approaching atomistic
dimensions. As size reductions cannot go on indefinitely,1 important decisions lie
ahead after 40 extremely successful years of geometric scaling. Compared to the
tried and tested MOSFET, a superior switching device ought to
1

Current expectations are that MOSFETs should continue to behave as such down to a channel
length in the order of 7 nm before source-to-drain tunneling will likely render further shrinks
pointless. Whether the electrical properties and unit costs of such devices will justify the
tremendous capital expenditures required to develop and produce them remains an open question,
though.

110

H. Kaeslin
impact ionijunction- zation FET;
less FET; CMOS tunnel FET;
CMOS
CMOS
GNR tunnel FET;
carbon
nanotubes
CMOG

?

switching device;
logic family
key virtue

≈1960
≈1945
relay

vacuum
tube

BJT;
TTL / ECL
high speed

≈1985

MOSFET;
≈1965 NMOS / PMOS ≈1975
high density @ low cost
or

MOSFET;
CMOS
low power → high perf.
≈1995

BJT & MOSFET;
BiCMOS

≈2015

III-V & Ge FETs;
FPNI-CMOS
??-FET;
CMOS

finFET;
CMOS

memristor;
crossbar logic
quantum
devices

refractive gate;
mux-based logic

RSFQ/
spintronics
Josephson molecular
junction
devices
must operate at
cryogenic temperatures

?

Fig. 4 Predominant computing technology, past, present, and future (note: years indicate
massive shifts, not date of announcement). Source [1]

•
•
•
•

operate with a lower voltage swing,
exhibit a more abrupt ‘‘on’’-‘‘off’’ transition,
manage with smaller electrical charges, and
be insensitive to or take advantage of atomistic effects.

Fabricating isolated devices does not suffice to supersede CMOS, however. Any
realistic alternative must
•
•
•
•

combine billions of switches in a tiny volume,
offer comparable levels of performance,
be produceable in large quantities at comparable cost, and
operate at room temperatures.

Research into a ‘‘new switch’’ has been underway for quite some time. Many ideas
have been published, many prospective devices have been studied and simulated,
some have even been manufactured in the lab. However, no truly superior and
industrially viable replacement for the MOSFET has been demonstrated yet, and
research continues in multiple directions as summarized in Fig. 4. In a joint effort
by industry and academia, the semiconductor community regularly publishes their
assessments in the ‘‘International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors’’ [4].
In the meantime, industry is experimenting with ultra compact 3D assemblies of
processor and memory chips that reduce parasitic capacitances and so afford
further energy efficiency gains. This requires vertical interconnects between
stacked semiconductor chips, called through-silicon vias, and poses heat evacuation problems. Another active research avenue aims at locally replacing the silicon
in the transistors by high mobility semiconductors such as indium gallium arsenide
(for the n-channel MOSFETs) and germanium (for the p-channel devices). Current
plans are to deposit thin films of those materials on silicon wafers to avoid the
costs of exotic substrates. What justifies the extra process complexity is the

Semiconductor Technology and the Energy Efficiency of ICT

111

promise of energy efficiency gains on the order of 60 % that should result from
bringing the supply voltage down to a mere 0.5 V with no loss in performance [5].
A major challenge on the architecture side is to reconcile flexibility and a
simple programming model with energy efficiency. Agreeing on stable standards
for all those data and signal processing algorithms that involve frequent and stereotypical calculations would allow the ICT industry to develop fixed function
blocks for them and to incorporate those into future processors as a kind of
‘‘hardware subroutines’’. This would help because instruction set architectures
waste orders of magnitude more energy for certain highly repetitive calculations
than hardwired logic does.

4 Conclusions
While it is utterly clear that there can be no further progress without corresponding
improvements in energy efficiency, the thirst for ever higher data bandwidths, the
quest for better video resolutions, the current move towards storing everything in
the cloud rather than locally,2 the desire to communicate even with humble objects
over the Internet, and similar trends will in all likelihood continue to drive up the
energy demand of ICT as a whole. Unfortunately, CMOS scaling alone can no
longer be counted upon to yield the same gains in terms of performance, efficiency,
and cost reduction as in the past. And unless a radical breakthrough occurs,
growing capital needs will further restrict the number of manufacturers in the
semiconductor industry.

References
1. Kaeslin, H.: Top-Down Digital VLSI Design. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Boston (2014,
forthcoming)
2. Fuller, S.H., Millett, L.I.: Computing performance: game over or next level? IEEE Comput.
44(1), 31–38 (2011)
3. Liu, T.J.K.: Finfet: history, fundamentals and future. In: Short Course, Symposium on VLSI
Technology, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of
California, Berkeley (2012)
4. ITRS ERD Team: Emerging Research Devices (ERD). In: The International Technology
Roadmap for Semiconductors (2011)
5. Stevenson, R.: Compound semiconductors join the race to sustain Moore’s law. IEEE Spectr.
51(1), 15–18 (2014)
6. Baliga, J., Ayre, R.W., Hinton, K., Tucker, R.S.: Green cloud computing: balancing energy in
processing, storage, and transport. Proc. IEEE 99(1), 149–167 (2011)

2

See [6] for a study on the impact of cloud computing on ICT energy consumption.

