Social Practices, Households, and Design
in the Smart Grid
Cecilia Katzeff and Josefin Wangel

Abstract Considerable effort is put into the design and development of cleaner
and more efficient energy systems. In this paper, we describe the problems arising
when these systems are designed from a top-down technological perspective and
when much development fails to account for the complex processes involved since
people and their practices are key parts of transitioning to new systems. The
transition to a smart grid not only demands new technologies, but is also fundamentally dependent on households taking on a role as co-managers of the energy
system. The chapter illustrates how the emerging research field of ‘‘sustainable
interaction design’’ may play a role in supporting these roles and in shaping
sustainable practices.
Keywords Smart grids
interaction design



Energy use



Sustainable practices



Sustainable

1 Introduction
Most people do not even realize that they use electricity until the bill arrives.
We just use things—we work and play on computers, switch on the lights, make
coffee, and watch TV. Even though these things require electricity to work, it is not
C. Katzeff (&)
Interactive Institute Swedish ICT, Eskilstuna, Sweden
e-mail: cecilia.katzeff@tii.se
C. Katzeff  J. Wangel
Centre for Sustainable Communications CESC, KTH Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm, Sweden
e-mail: josefin.wangel@abe.kth.se
J. Wangel
Division of Environmental Strategies Research FMS, KTH Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm, Sweden
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
L.M. Hilty and B. Aebischer (eds.), ICT Innovations for Sustainability,
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 310,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09228-7_21

351

352

C. Katzeff and J. Wangel

the electricity as such we think about, but the activities. Usually, we do not pay
much attention to how our habits and practices rely on electricity use. This is
something most people in industrialized countries may agree on. However, in
many other areas of the world where the supply of electricity is not as reliable,
people’s everyday life looks different. For instance, in a country suffering from
political and economic instability, the population is affected not least with regard
to electricity supply. People may have long power cuts every day in their homes.
When this happens, they are painfully reminded about having used electricity. The
absence of electricity becomes the evidence for its existence. The lack of electricity is reflected in their lives in a way that radically contrasts their everyday
practices from those in the Western world. The unpredictability of then electricity
will be available affects households in that they have to learn which activities
they need electricity for, and plan to do these when electricity is available. Thus,
they might be forced to seize the opportunity to wash, iron, cook, and charge their
computers when electricity is available, since they know that that might change
from one moment to the next.
The above example describes a scenario where the energy system mediates
practices in a way where the relationship between politics and people’s
household activities is very clear. The instability of the political situation leads
to unsystematic delivery of electricity, which in turn has direct consequences for
households’ access to electricity. In Western society, the relationship evidently
also exists, but here, the supply of electricity is taken for granted and conceived
of as one of the cornerstones of a modern society. The energy system has
traditionally been characterized by centralized production and distribution of
electricity and clear institutional borders between the producers and users of
energy. However, major changes are taking place in this system that forms the
very core of modern society. New ‘‘smart’’ technology is directed toward
making the energy system more efficient through peak load management, energy
conservation, and local production of renewable energy. The term ‘‘smartness’’
denotes the integration of information and communication technology into the
power system. Considerable effort is being invested into the design and development of cleaner and more efficient energy systems. However, these systems
have often been designed from a top-down technological perspective, and much
development thus fails to account for the complex processes involved since
people and their practices are key parts of transitioning to new systems. Society
faces a challenge in caring for technical, social, and psychological needs in the
development and implementation of the future energy system. This challenge
may and must be approached by combining competences from different fields.
In this paper we highlight the approaches of social practices and interaction
design.
The expected future of the electrical grid is usually referred to as a ‘‘smart
grid.’’ Although there is no unified concept of what a smart grid is, the transition to
smart grids will involve the whole energy conversion chain from generation to

Social Practices, Households, and Design in the Smart Grid

353

consumers (SG3 Roadmap).1 The power flow will change from being unidirectional to bidirectional between generation, transmission, and end users.
The transition to a smart grid not only demands new technologies, but is also
fundamentally dependent on households taking on a new role in relation to the
energy system. One aspect of this new role derives from the need for more active
consumers who are encouraged to change their energy use patterns in response to
supply conditions, e.g. through pricing mechanisms. The second aspect concerns
households’ involvement in the micro-production of energy, i.e. shifting from
being consumers of energy to being prosumers. Prosumer is a term used to denote
the dual role of a person being both a producer and a consumer of a certain
commodity. Inherent to both of these aspects is the active participation of energy
users as co-managers in the energy system.
Few smart grid visions and initiatives have, however, succeeded so far in
recognizing and including the social side of energy use in a satisfactory way.
Rather than embracing the socio-material complexity of energy use, end users are
typically depicted as consumers/producers/prosumers driven only by environmental concern and/or potential economic benefits. Moreover, the willingness and
possibilities of these end users to shoulder the role as prosumers and to adapt to the
required changes in technologies and practices is rarely made a topic of discussion.
Regardless whether ICT is considered as an option for dematerialization, demobilization, or smart operation, see, e.g., [1] end users are a fundamental cog in the
wheel of energy production and consumption [2–4].
The aim of this paper is twofold. First, it aims at exploring how the vision of the
smart grid fits with sociological insights on the constitution of everyday life and its
energy use. Secondly, it discusses the role of interaction design for the formation
of sustainable habits and everyday practices in relation to the smart grid.

2 Practicing the Smart Grid
2.1 From Technological Fixes and Behavioral Change…
How planners and policy-makers perceive citizens and behavioral change is
decisive for the measures proposed and implemented [5–7]. In current sustainable
development agendas, technological fixes and behavioral change often constitute
the standard pair of solutions [4]. While technological development (i.e., energy
efficiency) is left to market forces or promoted through supra-national or national
standards, behaviors are typically tackled through economic incentives and educational campaigns to ‘‘empower citizens, as consumers, to make sustainable
environmental choices’’ [26, p. 3]. This is because ‘‘only consumers who are aware

1

IEC Smart Grid Standardization Road Map, June 2010, Edition 1.0.

354

C. Katzeff and J. Wangel

of the benefits of energy efficiency and are empowered to make informed choices
can be drivers for change’’ [27, p. 50]. Smart grid initiatives are no exception to
this.
Indeed, it has repeatedly been shown that both information and incentives have
an effect, but it is also clear that the extent of change is limited concerning the
number of people influenced, the scope of the change, and the duration for which it
persists (see e.g. [3, 4]). Such shortcomings are typically explained by a deficiency
in knowledge, understanding, or commitment [8, 9]. This ‘‘deficit model’’ is
typically based on the assumption that if people only knew better, they would
change their attitude (A), their behavior (B), and the (consumer) choices (C) they
make [10]. However, this ‘‘ABC model’’ of policy intervention receives little
support in empirical studies on how information affects behavior [11–14]. One
proposed alternative explanation is that many incentives and interventions have
been too focused on making technical and economic sense while disregarding the
social logic of energy use [4, 12, 15, 16]. This explanation is underpinned by
numerous studies clearly showing that technical, social, cultural, and institutional
dimensions also need to be taken into consideration in order to understand patterns
of consumption [13, 14, 17, 18].

2.2 …to a Social Practice Approach
Warde [19], Shove and Pantzar [20], Hargreaves et al. [21], and Strengers [22],
among others, have drawn attention to how practice theory may be used to
understand transitions to sustainability. In contrast to the deficit-based explanatory
models, social practice theory highlights that understanding energy use requires
replacing the idea of individual consumers and instead focusing on practices (what
people do) and communities of practice (in which socio-material environments
those practices are played out). Accordingly, what people do, and why and when
they do it, is not to be seen as the result of individual decision-making, but as both
an outcome and a part of an intricate multi-dimensional ecology of everyday life
practices, each sustained by a specific mix of materials, images, and skills [20]. The
materials dimension comprises technologies and other matters needed to perform a
practice. The images dimension comprises the meaning of performing a practice
related to a desired image, and the skills dimension comprises both the knowledge
and the know-how needed to manage a technology and perform a practice.
In the contemporary smart grid discourse, the materials are at the core; it is
through the dissemination and connection of solar panels, smart meters, interfaces,
and automation and control devices that the energy system is to become smart. But
besides these ICT materialities, transition to a smart grid is also dependent on the
dissemination of other types of consumer goods such as electric cars and smart
washing machines, see, e.g. [23–25]. The proposed image related to the smart grid
is that of the prosumer: an environmentally engaged and economically driven
person with a benevolent view of technology; or, to use the wording of the

Social Practices, Households, and Design in the Smart Grid

355

European Commission [26, 27]: an ‘‘empowered’’ and ‘‘informed’’ type of citizenconsumer. The smart grid also demands a certain set of skills from its users who
need to be able to, first, select the ‘‘right’’ types of home appliances and other
household technologies needed to make the smart grid function and, second, be
able to use and control these technologies in the ‘‘right’’ way.
Drawing further on social practice theory, altering practices requires all three
types of elements, i.e. materialities, images, and skills, to be taken into consideration, and not separately, but as a consistent whole: ‘‘new practices consist of
new configurations of existing elements or of new elements in conjunction with
those that already exist. From this point of view, innovations in practice are not
simply determined by the generation of new products, images or skills. What really
matters is the way in which constituent elements fit together’’ [20], p. 61.
Thus, in order for smart grid practices to emerge, the materialities need to be
related to existing or created images with an appealing connotation, such as in
Fig. 1 below, which portrays the smart home in an attractive way, but also to the
set of skills needed to perform the practice. In some communities of practice these
skills are already in place, in others they need to be developed.
From a social practice perspective, it becomes apparent that an introduction of
smart grids does not only imply a change of technologies (from knobs and
switches to interfaces, and from old appliances and machines to new and smart
ones), but also of practices, which renders it crucial to take into account the entire
socio-material context of the proposed change.

2.3 Smart Grid Practices
For the expected potentials of smart grid technologies to be realized, a number of
prerequisites need to be fulfilled. Firstly, the smart grid entails a set of new
technologies, competences, and meanings that need to be adopted by households.
Secondly, the technology must not only be adopted initially, due to curiosity or a
flair for novelties, but must be used continuously. In other words, it must become
embedded into the practices of the households, which happens only when the
technology is linked to both meaning and competence; ‘‘products (‘things’) alone
have no value. They do so only when integrated into practice and allied to requisite
forms of competence and meaning’’ [20]. If a smart meter is not meaningful to me,
I will not use it.
The smart grid concept not only includes new technologies, but also entails a
change in roles, namely adjusting energy use to the supply at critical times or in
response to energy market prices, which might in turn involve a desired change in
householders’ everyday practices in relation to optimal conditions for using
electrical appliances. This is usually referred to as load balancing or load management and peak shaving. It might be controlled by the energy companies, or
it might entail a change in consumers’ roles, depending upon which strategy
is selected. As Nyborg and Røpke [28] observe, the smart grid concept is

356

C. Katzeff and J. Wangel

Fig. 1 An example of an image of smart technology, also featuring materialities and skills.
From: http://www.komsa.com.cn/en/product/product.asp?BigclassID=78

characterized by a high level of interpretative flexibility (see also [29]). This is a
term from the social construction of technology research denoting how technological artifacts can have different interpretations for various social groups. The
smart grid concept sometimes possesses conflicting interpretations of how technological solutions should be designed [28]. For instance, a major issue concerns
load management in the household in order to provide flexibility. Should this be up
to the households themselves or to the electricity companies? At least two major
strategies seem to prevail. One strives for automatic design of dwellings and
appliances, whereas the other is directed towards applying instruments to motivate
householders to contribute to load balancing and peak shaving. The predominant
instruments for motivating consumers to adjust their energy use are dynamic price
models and visualization of energy use based on frequent measurements at the
household level as well as the level of appliances. The latter will be treated in
depth in Sect. 4.
In the following section, we will discuss how interaction design can be used as a
tool to these ends, but first we will approach these challenges from a practice
perspective.
Peak Load Management Through Laundry. Peak load management is a way to
cut or shave peaks in energy use and/or to align them with peaks in energy
production. Today, energy use in most households peak at the same time(s). The
first peak occurs in the morning when people get up and get ready for school or
work. The other, bigger peak occurs in the early evening when people get back
home, cook dinner, watch TV etc. Proposals for cutting these peaks include
shifting (some of) the energy demanding activities in time, for instance by having
‘‘smart’’ laundry machines take care of the laundry at night instead of in the

Social Practices, Households, and Design in the Smart Grid

357

evening—or during the day when the energy use is high in industries and other
work places. However, such a shift relies not only on people being willing to
change their laundry routines, but also on household having access to their own
laundry machines, which is not always the case. Moreover, it is practically
impossible to shift some practices (or the use of material components of practices)
in time, such as lighting, cooking dinner, or watching TV. In these cases, the focus
must be on energy efficiency rather than on peak load management.
Decreasing Energy Use Through Smart Metering. Another common proposal
for smart technology (in the smart grid) to render the energy system more efficient
and sustainable is the introduction of smart metering. Smart metering is a both
automating and persuasive type of ICT through which the user can control and/or
be informed about energy use at home. Much research has explored what effect
smart meters actually have on energy use, and the results differ, from realized
savings to an actual increase in energy use due to the increased possibility of
controlling indoor climate, see e.g. [30, 31]. Clearly, economic or environmental
gains do not always carry more weight than comfort.

3 Empirical Studies of New Types of Roles for Households
3.1 Changing Energy Use Patterns
In recent years, a few empirical studies have been carried out to analyze household
behavior in a smart grid context. In [32], Christensen et al. explored how differences between Denmark, Norway, and Spain influence the understanding of the
role of households in the smart grid. The study also points to challenges and
discrepancies in existing approaches to integrating households in the smart grid.
The authors especially emphasize the importance of understanding the interaction
between smart grid technology and everyday practices.
Another study along a similar path is [33], where Nyborg and Røpke discuss
lessons to be learned from smart grid experiments focusing on consumers and the
role this type of experiments may play in the construction of smart grids. The
experiment studied is the first relating to smart grids in Denmark. The potential of
consumers’ flexibility was the focus of the study. One question dealt with whether
certain groups of consumers are more flexible than others. Another question discussed the nature of consumer groups that were not flexible.
The study identified five user profiles: the technical, the economical, the curious, the participating, and the comfortable. The first three are categorized as
enthusiastic and the latter two as interested, signifying a lower degree of
engagement. The profiles were segmented according to their use of the smart grid
equipment installed in their home, their life values, professional background,
knowledge of and relationship to ‘‘the electricity world,’’ and their motivations for
being part of the experiment [33].

358

C. Katzeff and J. Wangel

The study also identified factors influencing user flexibility. These were:
willingness, family composition, life situation, household infrastructure, and smart
technology in the home. Some other interesting insights were that there was a
significant flexibility potential in the use of heat pumps, that the householders
displayed openness towards being controlled by an external stakeholder, and a
relatively small experience of loss of comfort.

3.2 Micro-Production of Energy
The second change in practice concerns the shift inherent in the term ‘‘prosumers’’—
in the smart grid, the end users of energy will not only be consumers of energy, but
also producers. Private production of solar power is already a reality [34, 35]. When
end users become producers, this entails a change of the power landscape of energy
provision, trading, and use. Thus, the smart grid implies a new wave of electrification [36] and new networks of power, in the very same dual sense of the meaning
used by T.B. Hughes in his seminal book on the electrification of the Western society
[37]. This change in the system boundaries of the energy system is positive, as it
brings the previously black-boxed end use of energy out into the open, and in the
bigger-picture types of energy systems analysis as well. In other words, the
increasing interest in smart grids in policy and research holds the potential to make
real a long-sought change in perspective on the energy system, from being seen and
treated as a mainly technical system managing resources to a socio-technical system
managing services [38].

4 Designing for Sustainable Practice
As observed above, materials are at the center of the current smart grid discourse.
It is through the dissemination and connection of solar panels, smart meters,
interfaces, and automation and control devices that the energy system is to realize
its ‘‘smart’’ potential. Users, customers, and citizens emerge as vital links between
the vision of the smart grid, technology, and new services. These are the end users
of technology, and the way they use it depends on the context. Businesses as well
as households may be users. The point is that people are carriers of practice, and
their various skills in dealing with technology are part of a social practice.
We know from research in the behavioral sciences that the design of people’s
physical and technical space has a strong impact on their behavior. In the context
of the smart grid, people must be regarded primarily in their roles as human
beings, who are busy with their everyday activities and practices, rather than
merely being users of electricity. The design of new technology relating to the
smart grid needs to take this into consideration at every point of contact between
people and the smart grid. It needs to take into account the users of the technology.

Social Practices, Households, and Design in the Smart Grid

359

The design of this technology, including interface, information, etc., plays an
important part in realizing the smart grid ideas in a way that also fits the users it is
targeting.

4.1 Sustainable Interaction Design
The emerging research field referred to as ‘‘sustainable interaction design’’ [5]
focuses on how interaction design may play an important role in shaping
sustainable practices. So far, contributions in the field have mostly dealt with ecofeedback devices, i.e., devices providing feedback on certain types of energyrelated behavior [39, 40]. The feedback usually consists of information on electricity consumption and conservation. Major research issues concern the relationship of the design of this feedback to comprehension, engagement, and
behavior of users. Most studies target household practices [39, 41], but a few are
also directed to workplace practices [41, 42]. Although applying design to engage
people in the subject of sustainability is still in its infancy, some of the first
experiments using interaction design for visualizing energy use were carried out
around 2004—the Power-Aware Cord (Fig. 2) being an early prototype to illustrate how electricity feedback could be provided without detailed information
represented in numbers or graphs [43]. The Power-Aware Cord is an ambient
display in that its presence may be perceived with our peripheral senses, providing
continuous information without being distracting or obtrusive. The Power-Aware
Cord is a redesigned electrical power strip in which the cord is designed to
visualize the energy rather than hiding it. When electricity is used, this is represented through glowing pulses, flow, and intensity of light. Expressing the presence of energy through light can inspire people to explore and reflect upon the
energy consumption of electrical devices in their homes (Fig. 2).
Studies in human-computer interaction (HCI) focusing on the design of feedback to make users aware of environmental factors are sometimes referred to as
studies of ‘‘eco-feedback.’’ Froelich et al. [44] present a comparative survey of the
literature in this area, which relates the framework of human-computer interaction
to models within environmental psychology relevant for everyday life. The survey
addresses behavior change and criticizes eco-feedback studies in that they do not
attempt to measure behavior change. Some eco-feedback studies have designed
games for teenagers as a platform [45] and studied the use and engagement of the
rest of the household in energy conservation. Other examples of the design of
domestic eco-feedback applications, which have been studied in households,
include the Energy AWARE Clock (Fig. 3) [11] and EnergyCoach [41]. The clock
is a portable energy display that can be hung on a wall, placed on a table, or carried
around freely. It uses a time (i.e., analogue clock) metaphor to visualize electricity
consumption in a home. One intention is to use the clock metaphor in order to
depart from the concept of a meter and technological references to the discourse
used in the domain of electricity. Another is to facilitate transfer of some desired

360

C. Katzeff and J. Wangel

Fig. 2 The power-aware
cord (designed by the
Interactive Institute)

behavioral patterns, such as regularly glancing at an ordinary wall clock. The
overall idea of the Energy AWARE Clock is to make electricity use more concrete
in relation to ordinary activities as well as being a tool that could encourage
discussions about electricity consumption in the home. Recent overviews of the
field of sustainable HCI and interaction design are presented in [46–48].

4.2 Private Energy Production
User aspects of private and micro production of energy have recently attracted
attention. Existing research literature on the user group is quite scarce. Only a few
published studies around domestic solar power generation focus on the user groups
per se [34]. Tengvard and Palm [34] interviewed 20 households and analyzed their
decision-making regarding the adoption of small-scale photovoltaic panels and
wind turbines. According to the analysis, environmental concerns are the main
motive for these households. Some live ecological lifestyles in which the adoption
of photovoltaic panels or wind turbines represents a way to take action in the field
of energy. Yet for others the adoption is symbolic in displaying environmental
consciousness. Finally, some are motivated by the opportunity to protest against
the system with its large dominant actors.
The above results are supported by currently unpublished work from a study
carried out by the Interactive Institute. It is important to note that the interviews
reported above concern current private producers of wind and solar energy.
However, research also needs to focus on the next generation of producers
(‘‘prosumers’’). The motive of environmental concern identified by Tengvard and
Palm [34] is also found in a consumer survey of 2,000 Dutch households [35].

Social Practices, Households, and Design in the Smart Grid

361

Fig. 3 The energy AWARE
clock (designed by the
Interactive Institute)

Respondents were asked to report on their intentions to produce their own electricity. About 40 % of Dutch households have the intention to generate their own
power, with an overrepresentation of young households. Results show that environmental concerns are the largest driver of households’ intentions to generate
their own electricity. Other motives were affinity to energy and to a lesser extent to
technology. However, results did not point to financial motives for households to
generate their own power.
Although some research has been carried out on the target group of private
producers of energy, design aspects of the field are in their infancy. One issue to be
addressed is how to enhance the experience of producing one’s own electricity.
Another is how to show users how their production relates to their consumption of
electricity. This does not appear to be the main concern for manufacturers of solar
panels. Some solutions for visualizing domestic energy production are available on
the market. These are marketed by the manufactures of the inverters connected to
the solar panels, and most of them target a technical user group.

5 Interaction Design for the Smart Grid
In the future electrical grid, people’s consumption of electricity will have to be
managed in response to supply conditions. This entails, for example, adjusting
electricity use to supply at critical times or in response to market prices of energy.
In turn, this will involve a change of everyday practices in relation to information
communicated about optimal conditions for using electrical appliances.
To address issues oriented toward user aspects of the future electrical grid,
research needs to focus on the role of design and design research in the transition
to new behavioral patterns and social practices. We need to learn more about
implications for people as users of the future energy system. Central issues

362

C. Katzeff and J. Wangel

concern how sustainable practices may be formed in relation to the future electrical grid, what kind of information is needed to attract and maintain people’s
attention, and how to provide engaging interaction models. Automation and
intelligent technology play a role in the area of smart homes, but user aspects need
more attention. However, some interesting research on the use of intelligent
thermostats has recently been published [49].
Other important aspects are privacy, automaticity of household appliances and
systems, and private production of energy. Research in design has a central role for
developing concepts and prototypes for communicating relevant information with
the purpose of engaging households in the changing energy systems. Questions
need to be addressed concerning how design may integrate feedback, aesthetics,
and playfulness to influence people’s motivation and engagement to change their
practices relating to electricity consumption.
In order for people to understand, trust, and make effective use of these new
systems, careful attention must be paid not only to the more technical properties,
but also to how their use is developed, introduced, and sustained over time. The
transition to a smart grid and a sustainable society thus has to recognize the
complexity of social practices.

6 The Social Practice Perspective Revisited
Although researchers of social practices use different types of theoretical frameworks, there is a consensus that a social practice perspective may open new
opportunities to understand and potentially change everyday practices in a more
sustainable direction [50]. This perspective implies that human activities are part
of an ecology rather than isolated phenomena. They are viewed as parts of a
system. This may facilitate the reformulation of the question ‘‘how can we change
people’s behavior?’’ into more fruitful formulations in terms of relations and
dependencies such as those between everyday practices and power companies,
producers of white goods, etc. Regarding electricity use and sustainable lifestyles
from a social practice perspective facilitates the discovery of patterns in the
analysis of empirical data. There is currently a lack of this type of empirical
research. Hargreaves et al. [21] and Christensen et al. [51] provide exceptions.
Strengers [22, 52] approaches the Australian energy system from a practiceoriented standpoint according to which the power grid is seen as a technical system
mediating social practices. Including material infrastructure as an element of
everyday practices marks a clear contrast to the division between demand and
supply characterizing the energy sector. Technology and human activity are
clearly divided and approached by different disciplines. However, according to the
social practice perspective, technology, infrastructure, and human action are all
involved in constituting the practice. Instead of changing individual behavior,
social practice theorists refer to a change of elements constituting the practice.
This also entails a view of change as something emergent, dynamic, and

Social Practices, Households, and Design in the Smart Grid

363

uncontrollable [52]. The ‘‘problem’’ is about transforming technologically mediated social practices. Strengers [52] shows how social practice theory may refocus
and reposition roles and practices of professions charged with the responsibility
and agency for affecting and managing energy demand.
Acknowledgments The authors thank the Swedish Energy Agency and VINNOVA for funding
part of the reported work.

References
1. Mitchell, W.J.: E-topia, Urban Life, Jim—But not as We Know It. The MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass (2000)
2. Ellegård, K., Palm, J.: Visualizing energy consumption activities as a tool for making
everyday life more sustainable. Appl. Energy 88, 1920–1926 (2011)
3. Gram-Hanssen, K.: Understanding change and continuity in residential energy consumption.
J. Consum. Cult. 11(1), 61–78 (2011)
4. Gyberg, P., Palm, J.: Influencing households’ energy behaviour—how is this done and on
what premises? Energ. Policy 37(7), 2807–2813 (2009)
5. Berglund, C., Matti, S.: Citizen and consumer: the dual role of individuals in environmental
policy. Environ. Politics 15(4), 550–571 (2006)
6. Feichtinger, J., Pregernig, M.: Imagined citizens and participation: local agenda 21 in two
communities in Sweden and Austria. Local Environ. 10(3), 229–242 (2005)
7. Palm, J.: The public-private divide in household behavior: how far into home can energy
guidance reach? Energ. Policy 38(6), 2858–2864 (2010)
8. Bucchi, M., Neresini, F.: Science and public participation. In: Hackett, E.J., Amsterdamska,
O., Lynchm, M., Wajcman, J. (eds.) The Book of Science and Technology Studies, 3rd edn.
The MIT Press, Cambridge (2008)
9. Rayner, S., Malone, E.: Why study human choice and climate change? In: Rayner, S.,
Malone, E.L. (eds.) Human Choice and Climate Change, Vol. 2. Resources and Technology.
Battelle Press, Columbus (1998)
10. Shove, E.: Beyond the ABC: climate change policy and theories of social change. Environ.
Plann. 42(6), 1273–1285 (2010)
11. Bartiaux, F.: Does environmental information overcome practice compartmentalisation and
change consumers’ behaviours? J. Clean. Prod. 16(11), 1170–1180 (2008)
12. Robinson, J.B.: The proof of the pudding. Making energy efficiency work. Energ. Policy
19(7), 631–645 (1991)
13. Shove, E.: Gaps, barriers and conceptual chasms: theories of technology transfer and energy
in buildings. Energ. Policy 26(15), 1105–1112 (1998)
14. Tukker, A., Emmert, S., Charter, M., Vezzoli, C., Sto, E., Munch Andersen, M., Geerken, T.,
Tischner, U., Lahlou, S.: Fostering change to sustainable consumption and production: an
evidence based view. J. Clean. Prod. 16(11), 218–1225 (2008)
15. Crosbie, T.: Household energy studies: the gap between theory and method. Energ. Environ.
17(5), 735–753 (2006)
16. Shove, E.: Converging conventions of comfort, cleanliness and convenience. J. Consum.
Policy 26, 395–418 (2003)
17. Mont, O., Plepys, A.: Sustainable consumption progress: should we be proud or alarmed? J.
Clean. Prod. 16(4), 531–537 (2008)
18. Owens, S., Driffill, L.: How to change attitudes and behaviours in the context of energy.
Energ. Policy 36(12), 4412–4418 (2008)
19. Warde, A.: Consumption and theories of practice. J. Consum. Cult. 5(2), 131–153 (2005)

