The Material Basis of ICT
Patrick A. Wäger, Roland Hischier and Rolf Widmer

Abstract Technologies for storing, transmitting, and processing information have
made astounding progress in dematerialization. The amount of physical mass
needed to represent one bit of information has dramatically decreased in the last
few years, and is still declining. However, information will always need a material
basis. In this chapter, we address both the upstream (from mining to the product)
and the downstream (from the product to final disposal) implications of the
composition of an average Swiss end-of-life (EoL) consumer ICT device from a
materials perspective. Regarding the upstream implications, we calculate the
scores of the MIPS material rucksack indicator and the ReCiPe mineral resource
depletion indicator for selected materials contained in ICT devices, namely
polymers, the base metals Al, Cu, and Fe, and the geochemically scarce metals Ag,
Au, and Pd. For primary production of one kg of raw material found in consumer
ICT devices, the highest material rucksack and resource depletion scores are
obtained for the three scarce metals Ag, Au, and Pd; almost the entire material
rucksack for these metals is determined by the mining and refining processes. This
picture changes when indicator scores are scaled to their relative mass per kg
average Swiss EoL consumer ICT device: the base metals Fe and in particular Cu
now score much higher than the scarce metals for both indicators. Regarding the
downstream implications, we determine the effects of a substitution of primary raw
materials in ICT devices with secondary raw materials recovered from EoL consumer ICT devices on both indicator scores. According to our results, such a
substitution leads to benefits which are highest for the base metals, followed by
scarce metals. The recovery of secondary raw materials from EoL consumer ICT
P.A. Wäger (&)  R. Hischier  R. Widmer
Empa, Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology,
St. Gallen, Switzerland
e-mail: patrick.waeger@empa.ch
R. Hischier
e-mail: roland.hischier@empa.ch
R. Widmer
e-mail: rolf.widmer@empa.ch
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
L.M. Hilty and B. Aebischer (eds.), ICT Innovations for Sustainability,
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 310,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09228-7_12

209

210

P.A. Wäger et al.

devices can significantly reduce the need for primary raw materials and subsequently the material rucksacks and related impacts. However, increased recycling
is not a panacea: the current rapid growth of the materials stock in the technosphere necessitates continuous natural resource depletion, and recycling itself is
ultimately limited by thermodynamics.



Keywords ICT
Material rucksack
metals Materials recovery





Mineral resource depletion



Scarce

1 Introduction
Technologies for storing, transmitting, and processing information have a material
basis. Modern ICT is based on a multitude of hardware devices with specific,
complex materials compositions. The average materials composition of a consumer
ICT device at the end of its useful life (reference year 2010) in Switzerland has the
following characteristics: the majority of the mass of such a device consists of the
base metals iron (Fe), aluminum (Al), and copper (Cu), polymers (mainly ABS, PC,
PC/ABS, PE, PS, and SAN1) and glass [1–3] (see Fig. 1). Besides the three base
metals, consumer ICT devices also contain a large number of scarce metals,2
including, among others, gold (Au), indium (In), platinum group metals (PGM) such
as palladium (Pd) and platinum (Pt), rare earth elements (REE) such as dysprosium
and neodymium, silver (Ag), and tantalum (Ta) (see Fig. 1 for selected scarce
metals occurring in consumer ICT devices). In the last few decades, an increasing
number of elements represented in the periodic table has found its way into ICT [5],
which requires devices for infrastructure (e.g., servers, routers, switches, base stations, and optical fiber cables) in addition to consumer devices (Fig. 2).
However, the material composition of ICT devices (see Fig. 1 for end-of-life
consumer (EoL) ICT devices) tells only part of the story about the material basis of
ICT. Both ‘‘upstream’’ processes (mining, refining, and production of the raw
materials; production and assembly of the components; and the product itself) and
‘‘downstream’’ processes (product use, materials recovery, and final disposal)
associated with an ICT device generate a multitude of material flows which are not
obvious to its user [3, 6, 7].
In the following two sections, we will address up- and downstream implications
of the average materials composition of EoL) consumer ICT devices (reference
year 2010) in Switzerland, focusing mainly on metals.
1

ABS: acrylonitrile butadiene styrene; PC: polycarbonate; PC/ABS: polycarbonate/acrylonitrile
butadiene styrene blend; PE: polyethylene; PS: polystyrene; SAN: styrene acrylonitrile.
2
A metal is called geochemically scarce if it occurs at an average concentration below 0.01
weight percent in the earth’s crust [4]. In this chapter, we use ‘‘scarce’’ as a synonym for
‘‘geochemically scarce.’’

The Material Basis of ICT

Gold
0.0002%

211

Silver
0.0012%
Copper
4%

Aluminium
5%

Palladium
0.0001%
Other
6%

Iron
36%
Glass
19%

Polymers
30%
Fig. 1 Relative mass distribution of the materials contained in EoL consumer ICT devices in
Switzerland (reference year 2010) [1, 3]

Downstream

Upstream

Extraction
&
Mining

Refining

• energy
carriers
• auxiliary
materials
• waste

• energy
carriers
• auxiliary
materials
• waste

concentration

Component
& module
production
• energy
carriers
• auxiliary
materials
• waste

dilution

Product
assembly

• energy
carriers
• auxiliary
materials

Use
Product

Material
composition

Recovery
&
Disposal

• energy
• energy
carriers
carriers
• auxiliary
• auxiliary
materials
materials
• consumables • waste

dilution

concentration

Fig. 2 Processes and material flows (focus: metals) contributing to the material basis of an ICT
device, including the perspectives applied in this chapter (upstream and downstream) and metal
concentration and dilution phases along the life cycle

212

P.A. Wäger et al.

2 Upstream Issues
2.1 ICT Raw Material Rucksacks
Each of the materials determining the composition of an average ICT device is
associated with a material ‘‘rucksack’’ that includes all material flows connected to
their extraction/mining, refining, incorporation into components and modules, and
assembly of these components and modules to the final product. The calculation of
the material rucksack requires data on the material and energy flows of all processes involved. Figure 3 shows the material rucksack per kg of selected raw
materials found in ICT (polymers, the base metals Al, Co, and Fe, and the scarce
metals Au, Ag, and Pd) as material input per unit of service (MIPS) scores [8].
In addition to these material rucksacks, Fig. 3 also shows the implications for
mineral resource depletion. Mineral resource depletion is one of the issues typically addressed in the ongoing discussion on supply risks of mineral raw materials,
which have become a major issue due to emerging technologies’ increased demand
for scarce metals [9]. The new concept of criticality, which seeks to capture both
the raw material supply risks and the vulnerability of systems (e.g., companies,
sectors, economies, societies) to a potential raw material supply disruption,
emerged only some years ago [10, 11]. The criticality concept has meanwhile been
applied in several studies, showing that many scarce metals, among others gallium,
germanium, indium, PGM, REE, or Ta, are to be considered ‘‘critical.’’ Most of
these studies address long-term geological availability, some of them including
mineral deposit3 information. The criticality study commissioned by the European
Union [12], which is currently being updated, does not address geological availability because of the time horizon of the study (10 years) as well as reservations
with regard to the use of concepts such as ‘‘reserve’’,4 ‘‘reserve base’’,5
‘‘resource’’6 and the ‘‘static lifetime’’7 as indicators for geological availability.
In Fig. 3, the implications for mineral resource depletion per kg of raw materials found in ICT are represented by the ReCiPe8 life cycle assessment minerals

3

A deposit is any accumulation of a mineral or a group of minerals that may be economically
valuable [12].
4
A reserve is the part of the resource which has been fully geologically evaluated and is
commercially and legally mineable [12].
5
The reserve base is the reserve of a resource plus those parts of the resource that have a
reasonable potential for becoming economically available within planning horizons beyond those
that assume proven technology and current economics [12].
6
A resource is a natural concentration of minerals or a body of rock that is, or may become, of
potential economic interest as a basis for the extraction of a mineral commodity [12].
7
The static lifetime is the ratio between reserve or reserve base and annual mine production [12].
8
The authors chose the acronym ‘‘ReCiPe’’ because the method is expected to provide a recipe
for calculating life cycle impact category indicators and at the same time represent the initials of
the institutes that were main contributors to this project [13].

The Material Basis of ICT

213

1.0E+07
1.0E+06

kg/kg

1.0E+05
1.0E+04
1.0E+03
1.0E+02
1.0E+01
1.0E+00
Polym.

Fe

Al

Cu

Ag

Au

Pd

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

Mining & Refining

Production & Assembly

1.0E+05

kg Fe-Eq/kg

1.0E+04
1.0E+03
1.0E+02
1.0E+01
1.0E+00
1.0E-01
Polym.

Fe

Al

Cu

Ag

Au

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
Mining & Refining

Production & Assembly

Pd

214

P.A. Wäger et al.

b Fig. 3 Material rucksack and mineral resource depletion scores per kg of selected raw materials

found in ICT. Upper two diagrams MIPS scores in kg of total material input per kg of material
and corresponding shares of mining & refining and production & assembly. Lower two diagrams:
ReCiPe mineral resource depletion (primary resources) scores in kg Fe equivalents per kg of
material and corresponding shares of mining & refining and production & assembly. Data source
ecoinvent v3.01 [17]

resource depletion midpoint indicator (primary resources) [13]. This indicator
monetizes the energy requirements of resource extraction, with the marginal
increase of extraction cost per kg of extracted resource as a base for the model.
Other mineral resource depletion indicators used in life cycle impact assessment
calculate the ratio between use and deposits/reserves (CML method9), the surplus
energy required for mining resources with a decreased ore grade at some point in
the future (Eco-indicator method10), or exergy [16].
Both the MIPS score and the minerals resource depletion indicator in Fig. 3
were calculated with ecoinvent v3.01 data, using the allocation-based attributional
system model [17]. As shown in Fig. 3, the material rucksacks per kg of raw
materials found in ICT are significantly higher (by a factor of 1,000–10,000) for
the scarce metals Ag, Au, and Pd than for the polymers and the base metals Al and
Fe; Cu has a score that is closer to the three scarce metals than the two other base
metals. Almost the entire material rucksack for the scarce metals is determined by
the mining and refining processes (i.e., the process of concentrating them into raw
materials for production), while for all three base metals, the material rucksack is
partly (5–10 %) and for the polymers mainly (about 70 %) determined by the
production and assembly processes (i.e., dilution of the raw materials into products). Ag, Au, and Pd also score highest on the ReCiPe mineral resource depletion
indicator. The difference between Au and Pd, the two materials with the highest
scores for both indicators, is smaller for ReCiPe than for MIPS. Al has a higher
MIPS score than Fe, but a lower ReCiPe score. Compared to the material rucksack
indicator MIPS, the relative contribution of the production and assembly processes
(i.e., dilution of raw materials into products) as expressed by ReCiPe is considerably larger for polymers and Al and smaller for Fe.
Figure 4 shows the scores for the same materials, however with indicators
scaled to their relative mass per kg average EoL consumer ICT device. This
provides a completely different picture than Fig. 3 since the mass fractions of the
materials in the device are orders of magnitude apart from each other. The

9

The CML method is a problem-oriented impact assessment method developed at the Center of
Environmental Science (CML) of Leiden University (NL) and described in their ‘‘operational
guide to the ISO standards.’’ [14].
10
The Eco-Indicator ’99 method is an endpoint method that aggregates all impacts into three
different damage categories (damage to human health, to ecosystem quality, and to the available
resources). The method was developed in the Netherlands and is among the most often used life
cycle impact assessment methods in Europe [15].

The Material Basis of ICT

215

material rucksack scores are now by far the highest for Cu, followed by Fe,
polymers, and Au, while for the ReCiPe mineral resource depletion indicator,
the scores are highest for the base metals Cu and Fe, followed by the polymers
and Au.

3 Downstream Issues
3.1 Effects of Materials Recovery on Material Rucksacks
and Resource Depletion
In this chapter, we do not consider energy carriers, auxiliary materials, and consumables required in the use phase, as our focus is on the implications of the
material composition of a consumer ICT device. We therefore skip the use phase
in our downstream perspective and address the effects of materials recovery from
EoL consumer ICT devices. In particular, we elaborate on the effects of a substitution of primary raw materials with secondary raw materials recovered from
EoL consumer ICT devices on MIPS and ReCiPe mineral resource depletion
indicator scores, assuming that the recovered materials are used solely for the
production of new ICT devices. Two recovery rates are considered: rates currently
achieved in Switzerland and technically achievable rates. Concerning the recovery
of plastics, it has to be considered that their recycling potential is limited by
brominated flame retardants and other problematic additives [18]; when recycling
metals, significant quality and dilution losses might occur [19, 20]. The effects of
recycling are calculated as the difference between the scores resulting from
recycling activities and the (avoided) scores from primary production of the
material replaced by recycling. In the case of substitution of primary copper by
copper recovered from EoL consumer ICT devices, the scores obtained for the
process ‘‘Copper market for primary production only’’ are subtracted from the
scores calculated for the process ‘‘Metal part of electronics scrap, in blister copper
| treatment of, by electrolytic refining.’’
As shown in Fig. 5, the recovery of selected raw materials results in a
reduction of the material rucksack and resource depletion indicator scores shown
in Fig. 4. The environmental benefits are greatest for the base metals, with estimated current recovery rates of 90 % for Fe and 85 % for Al and Cu, followed by
scarce metals, with 80 % for Ag, Au, and Pd, and finally polymers with 40 %
[21]. Assuming technically achievable recovery rates of 70 % for plastics, 88 %
for Ag, Au, and Pd as well as 95 % for Fe, Al, and Cu [21], the improvement
potentials are highest for polymers with regard to the material rucksack indicator,
followed by Cu for both indicators, and Al, again with regard to the materials
rucksack indicator.

216

P.A. Wäger et al.

kg/kg ICT Device

40
32
24
16
8
0
Polym.

Fe

Al

Cu

Ag

Au

Pd

Cu

Ag

Au

Pd

kg Fe -Eq/kgICT Device

3.2
2.4
1.6
0.8
0
Polym.

Fe

Al

Fig. 4 Material rucksack and mineral resource depletion scores for selected raw materials,
scaled to their relative mass in 1 kg average Swiss EoL consumer ICT device. Top MIPS scores
in kg total material input per kg ICT device. Bottom ReCiPe mineral resource depletion (primary
resources) scores in kg Fe equivalents per kg ICT device. Data source ecoinvent v3.01 [17]

3.2 Scarce Metals Recovery
Despite the concentrations of scarce metals in EoL devices typically being much
lower than those of the base metals Al, Cu, and Fe, post-disassembly concentrations can be considered high compared to minimum profitable ore grades [5]. Yet
recovery rates of several scarce metals, such as gallium, germanium, indium, REE,
and Ta from EoL products have been shown to lie below 1 %, while the recovery
rates for ‘‘precious’’ scarce metals such as Ag, Au, Pd or Pt exceed 50 % [22].
Scarce metal recovery rates are a function of the efficiencies of the processes
determining the recycling chain, i.e., collection, pre-processing, and end-processing
[23].

The Material Basis of ICT

217

0%
-20%
-40%
-60%
-80%
-100%
Polym.

Fe

Al

Cu

Ag

Au

Pd

additional effects from potential recovery
effects of current recovery
0%
-20%
-40%
-60%
-80%
-100%
Polym.

Fe

Al

Cu

Ag

Au

Pd

additional effects from potential recovery
effects of current recovery

Fig. 5 Effects of the substitution of primary raw materials in ICT devices with secondary raw
materials recovered from EoL consumer ICT devices on material rucksack and mineral resource
depletion scores with current and potential (technically achievable) recovery rates. Top Reduction
of MIPS scores relative to primary production. Bottom Reduction of ReCiPe mineral resource
depletion indicator scores relative to primary production. 100 % corresponds to the scores
reported in Fig. 4

Collection efficiency for waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE)
depends on how well the collection systems in place are adapted to the habits of the
owners of the EoL product to be collected and how well they are informed about the
collection systems. The efficiency of pre-processing depends on the specific
implementation and combination of the different steps involved, namely sorting,
dismantling, and physical and chemical separation. In order to optimize their costs,
recyclers in countries such as Switzerland increasingly pre-process WEEE with
automatized, mechanical processes, manual dismantling being limited to separating
hazardous materials and disturbing materials before mechanical processing.
However, this may lead to mixing materials in a way that negatively affects the
recovery rates of certain materials. For example, scarce metals may end up in fine

218

P.A. Wäger et al.

plastic fractions sent to energy recovery processes, resulting in dissipation11 of the
metals [24, 25]. Several projects are currently investigating options to better exploit
the potential of manual dismantling of WEEE in view of higher scarce metals
recovery rates, including concepts aiming at integrating ‘‘best’’ pre-processing in
developing countries and ‘‘best’’ end-processing in international state-of-the-art
end-processing facilities (‘‘best-of-two-worlds approach’’) [26–30]. Other projects
aim at optimizing the allocation of output fractions from pre-processing to endprocessing [31]. It should be kept in mind for all of them that end-processing is
ultimately limited by thermodynamics, which is why certain metal combinations
cannot be successfully recycled [20, 32]. Accordingly, not only the actors determining the design of the collection, pre-processing, and end-processing systems
will have to take their responsibilities seriously to increase scarce metals recovery,
but also product designers.

4 Conclusion and Outlook
ICT is driving the rapid expansion of the material substrate contained in countless
devices in use, in terms of both absolute volumes and number of elements,
specifically scarce metals. This requires an accelerating intake of primary raw
materials, mainly minerals from the lithosphere, which is coupled with rapidly
growing material rucksacks. The recovery of secondary raw materials from EoL
devices can significantly reduce the need for primary raw materials and subsequently the material rucksacks and mineral resource depletion. However, increased
recycling is not a panacea:
• The materials stock in the technosphere is growing rapidly, which entails
continuing natural resource depletion. For substitution of primary resources by
secondary raw materials to become relevant, steady state conditions have to be
reached.
• The recovery rates of the majority of the elements, in particular scarce metals,
are very low. Some may be increased considerably, but many cannot, due to
thermodynamic limits in the established metallurgic processes of metal refining. Hence, considerable leakage from the envisioned ‘‘closed-loop economy’’
and dissipation to the environment seem unavoidable.
• In a closed loop economy, faster materials turnover due to e.g. shorter residence times of ICT devices leads to increased material losses into inaccessible
stocks. Primary raw materials are required to compensate for these losses.

11

‘‘Dissipation’’—in this context—refers to the dilution of a material in the technosphere or
ecosphere in such a way that its recovery is made practically impossible. The ‘‘technosphere’’
includes all objects and associated material flows that have been created by humankind and are
under its control [9].

The Material Basis of ICT

219

• The material rucksacks for raw materials production tend to increase with
decreasing ore grades, which most of the remaining deposits and mineral mines
are facing.
• Not only are the primary ore grades decreasing, but the secondary deposits
are also becoming less accessible as a result of continued miniaturization,
augmenting substrate complexity, and a forceful trend towards ‘‘pervasive
computing’’ [33].
• Some of the materials are being phased out from ICT, in particular some toxic
heavy metals such as Hg, Pb, and Cd. For example, under the recent UN
Minamata Convention on Mercury [34], Hg must no longer be recycled in the
technosphere. Therefore, disposal facilities that provide long-term safety are
needed, which may require new financing mechanisms.
In view of these perspectives, we draw the following conclusions:
• In the short term, recycling rates should be systematically maximized for the
specific elements contained in ICT devices, not just for their total mass. The
material turnover in a leaking loop economy needs to be slowed down, i.e.,
active residence time has to be maximized.
• In the medium term, raw materials production, ICT devices as well as recycling
processes have to be designed to achieve minimal material dissipation and
minimal material rucksacks.
• In the long term, the material substrates of ICT (as well as all other technologies) need to be changed toward the use of more abundant elements and
bio-compatible substances.

References
1. SWICO Recycling: Activity Report. In. Zürich, Switzerland (2011)
2. Haig, S., Morrish, L., Morton, R., Wilkinson, S.: Electrical product material composition.
Waste and Resources Action Programme, Branbury, Oxon (2012)
3. Müller, E., Widmer, R., Coroama, V., Orthlieb, P.: Material and energy flows and
environmental impacts of the Internet in Switzerland. J. Ind. Ecol. 17(6), 814–826 (2013)
4. Skinner, B.: Earth resources. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 76(9), 4212–4217 (1979)
5. Johnson, J.: Dining at the periodic table: metals concentrations as they relate to recycling.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 41(5), 1759–1765 (2007)
6. Stamp, A., Wäger, P.A., Hellweg, S.: Linking energy scenarios with metal demand
modeling—the case of indium in CIGS solar cells. Submitted to Resources, Conservation &
Recycling (2014)
7. Hischier, R., Coroama V.C, D., S., Ahmadi Achachlouei, M.: Grey energy and environmental
impacts of ICT hardware. In: Hilty, L.M., Aebischer, B. (eds.) ICT Innovations for
Sustainability. Springer, Germany (2014) (working Title)
8. Saurat, M., Ritthoff, C.: Calculating MIPS 2.0. Resources 2, 581–607 (2013)
9. Wäger, P.A., Lang, D.J., Wittmer, D., Bleischwitz, R., Hagelüken, C.: Towards a more
sustainable use of scarce metals. a review of intervention options along the metals life cycle.
GAIA 21(4), 300–309 (2012)

