The Interdependency of Energy,
Information, and Growth
Daniel Spreng

Abstract This contribution is based on the talk I gave at the conference on ICT
for Sustainability, February 14–16, ETH Zürich [1], in which I reopened the
discussion on the impact of ICT on energy consumption [2]. The chapter has four
sections. The introduction connects my topic to the conference theme. In part two,
I discuss energy conservation; the mutual substitutability of energy, time and
information; and some fundamental aspects of the nature of these three quantities.
In the third part I present two empirical case studies of this mutual substitutability.
Finally, in the fourth section, I conclude by speculating on what these results may
mean in term of ICT’s effects on sustainability, mindful of the role of time and of
economic growth in this interaction.
Keywords Substitution

 Rebound effect  Energy  Time use

1 Introduction
ICT holds great potential to contribute to sustainable development. Doing things
in a more controlled and intelligent manner can be an essential ingredient for a
long-term viable future.
Often energy consumption is used as a proxy for sustainability. Many people
would consider the use of this proxy to be a terrible simplification. There is no
room here to go into much detail here, but I would argue as long we do not assume
a linear relation but some sort of convex relationship, the energy consumption per
capita is good a proxy for sustainability as one can find.
For energy use per capita below 1 or 2 kW/capita sustainability increases
(extreme poverty decreases) with increasing energy consumption, however for
D. Spreng (&)
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
e-mail: dspreng@ethz.ch
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
L.M. Hilty and B. Aebischer (eds.), ICT Innovations for Sustainability,
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 310,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09228-7_25

425

426

D. Spreng

energy consumption per capita above a few kW/capita, and this is the case we are
interested in here, sustainability decreases with increasing energy consumption
(compare [3, 4]). Therefore, it is not inappropriate to narrow down the theme of the
conference to the effect of ICT on energy consumption.

2 Mutual Substitutability of Energy, Time
and Information
In the 1970s I thought about energy conservation and postulated that in order to
conserve energy, either time or information or both were needed. To produce any
given good or service, perform a task, some amounts of energy, time, and information are required. Reducing the energy input is achieved by increasing the time
and/or information input for the task.
In order to save energy one can either perform a task smarter or slower:
• more time reduces friction, losses in heat-transfer, etc.
• more information reduces unnecessary safety margins, trial-and-error operation, and—this is most important—useless and unused energy services.
A trip from A to B can be made more energy efficient
• by choosing a slow mode of travel, by not speeding
• by taking the best route, and best (high-tech) vehicle.
Thus, the inputs to produce a good or service can be characterized by the three
quantities energy, time and information. My hypothesis is that these inputs are
partially substitutable. The graphical representation of the hypothesis is an equilateral triangle. The various ways of perform a task are then represented by points
in the triangle, the distance to the sides measure the amounts of the three inputs
applied to the job (Fig. 1).
The triangle, sometime called Spreng Triangle, applied to energy conservation
then looks as follows (Fig. 2):
This mutual substitutability is often, but by no means always, observed in
processes and equipment on the technical plane.
The mutual substitutability of energy, time and information can, however, also be
seen on a micro-economic plane. It is possible to position economic sectors within
this equilateral triangle by calculating for each sector the cumulated energy and
cumulated time (labor) input to produce a good or service worth a dollar and then
examining what the relative, cumulative information input is, assuming no other
input is necessary [5]. Standard economic theory would suggest that besides labor,
capital is the most important input, supplemented perhaps by additional resources
other than energy. However, focusing on physical inputs at the level of the triangle,
one can argue that energy is reasonably good proxy for any resource and that capital is
money earned at some earlier time period and therefore not much different from
cumulated labor. Marx called capital ‘‘geronnene Arbeit,’’ labor hardened like blood.

The Interdependency of Energy, Information, and Growth
Fig. 1 A good or service can
either be produced by the
inputs EA, tA and IA or the
inputs EB, tB and IB,—i.e., by
the input relationships A or B

100% Energy

427
100% Information

Time = 0

ta

A
Ia

tb
Ea

B
Eb

Ib

100% Time

Fig. 2 From the
substitutability hypothesis
follows that there are various
ways to save energy. Both
using more time and using
more information can have
the desired effect

Maximum Energy

Maximum Information
Time

Info

Energy

Energy consermeasure
vation measure2

Energy conservation measure 1

MaximumTime

A good worth a dollar can be produced and a service worth a dollar can be
rendered in various sectors with different characteristic ratios of the energy, time
and information. The result of plotting economic sectors in such an energyinformation-time triangle (Fig. 3) is supportive of the idea of substitutability and
also hints at the meaning of cumulated information (see footnote 1 in [5]).
Cumulated information turns out to be high in modern, high-tech industrial sectors.
For energy and time (measured in working hours) the cumulated inputs are calculated. The information input is the plausible result of the plotting procedure.
On the macroeconomic plane, the triangle allows to speculate about the
direction of the future development of nations. ICT pushes nations powerfully in
the direction of the top right corner of the triangle. Whether this leads to less time,
a society of harried men and women, or less energy, a society of starving philosophers, depends also on other factors, such as price level of labor and resources
(Fig. 4).

428

D. Spreng
Time (working hours) = 0
Time

•Energy

Real estate •

Radio/TV•
Ordinance•
Paints•
•Drugs
Plastics •
Iron & Steel• Metal p
production
• Engines, turbines
•
Paper •
• Household appliance
Food •
Fabric and textile production •
Amusement
•
Fabric and mills•

Chemical Products •
•Asphalt

Footware •
Livestock •
Hotels, personal services •
Agriculture, forestry
•
and fishery services

Fig. 3 Industrial activities require energy, time and information inputs in various proportions [5]

Fig. 4 ICT pushes nations
powerfully in the direction of
the top right corner;
information input becoming
more and more important

Harried man
Time = 0

?
ICT-push

Primitive
man
Information = 0

Cheap
energy
High
wages

Starving
philosopher
Energy
gy = 0

The concept of the triangle may seem to be a bit simplistic. However, by being
careful about the exact meaning of the three inputs, the concept gets rather
complex and subtle.

The Interdependency of Energy, Information, and Growth

429

Characterization of the energy input: Even though there are
• four thermodynamic potentials (as well as energy),
• many commercial and non-commercial forms,
• although time and location matters a lot in terms of usefulness,
the definition is rather straight forward.
It is important to note, that energy is an extensive quantity (i.e. it depends on
quantity). The quantitative relationship between energy on the three levels (technical, micro and macro) is the topic of many models (bottom-up, top-down etc.).
Time, on the other hand, is a mysterious quantity. Time is
• both extensive (time period) and quasi intensive (time availability: 24 h a day,
life time),
• an irreversible flow,
• both linear (in the technosphere) and cyclical (in nature),
• chronos and kairos.
However, time is easily measureable on the technical level and labor (one aspect of
time) or free-time, can be measured on the micro and macro level.
Information (as applied to a task) includes many aspects, depending on how
close it is to being applied and also whether it is static or dynamic. Figure 5 is
drawn to illustrate this complexity.
To some degree information has an elusive meaning, differently specified (and
measured) on various levels. On the technical level it can have the specification as
given in Fig. 5. On the microeconomic level it would refer more to the choice of
technologies (in particular ICT), the skill of personnel, the choice of products and
services by consumers.
On the macroeconomic level the penetration of ICT in national economies is
important, as well as the education of the labor force, the concentration and clustering
of high-tech firms and demand for quality rather than quantity of products and services.
In summary, the meaning of energy is rather straight forward, although one has
to be careful of not mixing-up the technological, microeconomic and macroeconomic planes; time is a mysterious quantity, but neglecting it leads to serious
errors; and information is what changes our societies and lives these days, it has
different meanings in various and varying settings. Substitutability of energy, time
and information is not a law of physics, but is
• often a fact on the technical level (old saying: haste makes waste), but there are
many exceptions,
• on the microeconomic level, substitutability is often plausible (see triangle with
economic sectors), but the elusiveness of energy, time and information makes
quantification difficult and
• on the macroeconomic level it is an intuitive truth that nations with much
stability (giving change the time it requires) and high innovative capacity
(putting a high value on information) seem to be more sustainable (using
energy and other natural resources sparingly).

430

D. Spreng

application

static

dynamic
depth

Fig. 5 Various aspects of information on the technical level (as applied to a task)

3 Two Empirical Case Studies of the Mutual
Substitutability
Research, my group did in the 1980s, particularly the two following case studies,
was based on the triangle.
Case Study I. In the first project we looked carefully at the energy effects of the
introduction of computers in various parts of textile industry. The heart of the
research, the PhD thesis of Rolf Bergrath, was an examination of the energy
conservation potential of electronics used for air conditioning spinning mills. As it
turned out, the energy conservation potential was huge.
The automated control in all corners of the mill allowed the safety margins to
be reduced and thus the temperature at which the climate had to be set could be
increased. As the electricity requirement for air conditioning is a large part of the
cost of spinning, this reduction in the cooling requirement proved to be economically important.
However, as it turned out, electronics also improved the spinning machines.
The much more tightly controlled spinning process allowed higher speeds without
increasing the frequency of yarn ruptures, a decisive factor for the productivity of
the mill. The higher speed caused much more heat, and thus the energy requirement for air conditioning did not decrease. The energy requirement per yarn may
have decreased, but the energy requirement in the now more productive mill
increased rather than decreased.
Similar effects could be observed in all parts of the textile industry. However,
with the introduction of computers everywhere in the industry, including the
commercial side, the industry as a whole could react more quickly to the wishes and
whims of the market, thus greatly speeding-up fashion cycles and increasing
demand. The overall effect of the early introduction of modern IT in the textile

The Interdependency of Energy, Information, and Growth
Modules
of LESIT
program

Silicon
Power Device Technology

Power
Electronic
Circuits

Energy
E
Sector

Areas of
Application

Impact
p
Areas

Power
Electronic
Systems

Microsensor
Technology

Industrial
Production

Indoor
Comfort

Society
y

+

-

Radio
Communications

Comfort
C
f t
Control

Trafic

Economy
y

-

Dielectric Electronic
Materials

Microwave
g
and Gigabit Electronics

Audio/Video
A
di /Vid
Equipment

Leasure

+

431
Reliability and
EMC

C
Communication
i ti
Human/Human

Work Place

Communication
Human/Machine

Energy and
Environment

+

-

Fig. 6 Advances in power electronics were pursued, within the LESIT program in various
modules (top row), all of these could potentially lead to improvement of power electronics
implementations in a myriad of applications (middle row). All of these would then have impacts
on societal, economic and energy/environmental developments (bottom row)

industry was so profound that it could not be rigorously quantified. It was difficult to
isolate the effect from changes that occurred in the global economy as a whole [6].
The only definite conclusion was that IT greatly amplified the potential for both
increases and decreases in energy consumption; IT enabled both significant energy
conservation measures, on the one hand, and new business opportunities and new
ways of speeding-up production and demand on the other.
Case Study II. This case study was a technology assessment project. We were
asked to find out how much energy was saved with the creation and introduction of
improved power electronic components and devices. In particular we looked at a
large research program, called LESIT, supported by the Swiss government, which
had as its goal to advance the technology of power electronics. The program
comprised the 8 modules listed in the top row of Fig. 6.
Like in case study I, our research came to the conclusion that although the
use of newly developed power electronics did reduce the energy requirement of
a given application, on the macroeconomic level the effect was more likely a
speeding-up of industrial production, travel and consumption and thus an overall
increase in economic activity and energy demand, even if energy efficiency had
been improved at many points. Although the technology assessment we conducted was a sizable undertaking, involving several research groups and disciplines,1 we could not study all possible effects (see Fig. 6), but we concentrated

1

The assessment was done by a multi-disciplinary team including F. Varone, B. Aebischer, W.
Eichhammer, E. Gruber, St. Kuhlmann, D. von Wichert-Nick and is described in [7].

432

D. Spreng

on three topics, typical for the three stages of the innovation process involved
(see Fig. 7).
In my opinion, discussions of the rebound effect often do not pass a reality
check. Pure energy conservation measures are rare. Most technological innovations called energy efficiency innovations are innovations that among other things
improve energy efficiency (Fig. 8).
Energy efficiency innovation almost always includes some co-benefits. In the
case of the train engines, smoother traction, faster acceleration, smaller engines etc.

Stages of the
innovation process

Focus

Applied research and
technology development

1

Technology transfer
and production

Sale and use of new
products

Object of the
analysis

Topic

Perceptions of
researchers on impacts
on energy consumption

Selected products
and
research methods

2

Research co-operation
industry and academia /
Technology transfer

Energy considerations when choosing
industry partners

3

Impactof "intelligent
buildings" on users

Marketing situation
for new energy
optimal products

Fig. 7 The technology assessment was conducted by focusing on three topics

Energy consumption, in relative units

1.2
Re opt

1.0

0.8

-0.5%/year

Ae

460 IGBT

Re

0.6

0.4
1950

460

1975

460++

2000

-1%/year

2025

2050

Fig. 8 Energy consumption of several train engines (Ae 6/6, Re 6/6, 460) is plotted in function
of their first year of service. 460 IGBT (incorporating much LESIT-technology) shows reduced
energy consumption exactly in line with the business-as-usual trend

The Interdependency of Energy, Information, and Growth

433

were economically more important to take advantage of than fully exploiting higher
energy efficiency. Generally, co-benefits of energy efficiency innovation, like
reduced cost and higher convenience (e.g., time savings for the user) are economically attractive and will often generate economic growth.
More often than not, as with ICT in the textile industry or power electronics, the
energy efficiency effect, clearly evident at the level of one application, does not
lead to energy conservation on the macroeconomic level. Energy conservation is a
cultural achievement, but is not natural to us (Westerners), it requires valuing
leisure, where as energy efficiency often increases without special effort and does
not necessarily lead to energy conservation.

4 Conclusion
The disappointing results of the case studies show that ICT is mostly used to
accelerate processes, markets and national economies: time is money. As long as
time costs more than energy, ICT will likely be applied to save time rather than
energy. The time saved may be labor on the production side or it may be time
saved, i.e. greater convenience, on the consumer side. Economic growth is often
regarded as the remedy for unemployment. However, promoting ICT applications
indiscriminately is not a good way to combat unemployment. ICT, although very
suitable to push economic growth, often contributes to economic growth by saving
labor.
Only if ICT is applied discriminately to do things smarter, wary of automation
and higher speeds, will its increased use lead to higher economic growth, without
reducing the labor intensity of products and services. This type of growth has the
potential to be less resource intensive as well. The debate on aiming at qualitative
growth rather than quantitative growth, conducted in the 1980s, has almost been
forgotten but needs to be revived.
If time (an important fraction of labor) and cumulated time (an important
fraction of capital) cost more than energy (and other natural resources) and if
consumer preferences remain unchanged then more ICT leads over all to
• no energy conservation, but instead to
• time savings, faster production and economic growth,
• i.e. higher labor and capital productivity (likely more unemployment and
cheaper products).
ICT could easily lead to more sustainability, if
• leisure,
• quality of products and services and
• energy as well as other natural resources would be more highly valued.

434

D. Spreng

Policy design should take into account both the
• massive transformative power of ICT and
• the necessity to correct present incentives on all levels (from international to
personal) to steer ICTs application, and with that ICTs effects, in the desired
direction.

References
1. Spreng, D.: Interactions between energy, information and growth. In: Hilty, L.M., Aebischer,
B., Andersson, G., Lohmann, W. (eds.) ICT4S 2013: Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Information and Communication Technologies for Sustainability, ETH Zurich,
Feb 14–16, pp. 6–7. E-Collection ETH Institutional Repository (2013). ISBN:978-3-90603124-8, doi:10.3929/ethz-a-007337628, 288–300
2. Spreng, D.: Does IT have boundless influence on energy consumption? In: Hilty, L.M., Gilgen,
P.W. (eds.) Sustainability in the Information Society—15th International Symposium
Informatics for Environmental Protection, pp. 81–90. Metropolis Verlag, Marburg (2001).
ISBN:3-89518-370-9
3. Kemmler, A., Spreng, D.: Energy indicators for tracking sustainability in developing countries.
Energy Policy 35, 2466–2480 (2007)
4. Spreng, D.: Distribution of energy consumption and the 2,000 W/capita target. Energy Policy
33, 1905–1911 (2005)
5. Spreng, D.: Possibility for substitution between energy, time and information. Energy Policy
21(1), 13–23 (1993)
6. Spreng, D., Hediger, W.: Energiebedarf der Informationsgesellschaft. Verlag der Fachvereine
Zürich (1987)
7. Spreng, D.: Technology assessment: impact of high-tech engineering research on energy
consumption. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 69, 819–831 (2002)

