The Energy Efficiency Benefits
and the Economic Imperative
of ICT-Enabled Systems
John A. Skip Laitner

Abstract The global economy is not particularly energy-efficient. At current levels
of consumption, we now waste about 86 % of the energy now used to maintain
economic activity. This magnitude of waste imposes huge costs that constrain the
robustness of the world economy. At the same time, however, there is an array of
untapped cost-effective energy efficiency resources that can restore both energy
and economic efficiency. Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) may
be the key to unlocking that potential.
Keywords Information and communication technologies
Energy productivity

 Energy efficiency 

1 Introduction
In his speech ‘‘The American Scholar,’’ philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson noted
an ancient oracle that said, ‘‘All things have two handles: beware of the wrong
one’’ [1]. The continuing debate about ensuring an adequate supply of low-cost
energy may be grabbing for the wrong handle. In a similar way, thinking about
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) merely as an emerging high
tech market phenomenon may also be grabbing the wrong handle. It turns out that
improvements in energy efficiency are critical drivers of a more robust and sustainable economy. At the same time, ICT devices, appliances, and networks may
be the key to unlocking a more energy-efficient future.
All interactions of matter involve flows of energy. This is true whether they
have to do with earthquakes, the movement of the planets, or the various biological
and industrial processes at work anywhere in the world. Within the context of a
J.A.S. Laitner (&)
Economic and Human Dimensions Research Associates, Tucson, AZ, USA
e-mail: EconSkip@gmail.com
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
L.M. Hilty and B. Aebischer (eds.), ICT Innovations for Sustainability,
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 310,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09228-7_2

37

38

J.A.S. Laitner

regional or national economy, the assumption is that energy should be used as
efficiently as possible. An industrial plant working two shifts a day 6 days a week
for 50 weeks per year, for example, may require more than one million U.S.
dollars (USD) per year in purchased energy if it is to maintain normal operations.
An average American household may spend USD 2,000 or more per year for
electricity and natural gas to heat, cool, and light the home as well as to power all
of the appliances and devices within the house. And an over-the-road trucker may
spend USD 1,500 on fuel to haul a load of freight 4,800 km from Quebec to Los
Angeles. Regardless of either the scale or the kind of activity, a more energyefficient operation can lower overall costs for the manufacturing plant, for the
household, and for the trucker. The question is whether the annual energy bill
savings are worth either the cost or the effort that might be necessary to become
more energy-efficient?1
In one sense of the word, the global economy is hugely energy inefficient. At
current levels of consumption, for example, the U.S. economy converts only 14 %
of the total energy it uses into economic activity. This means that the United States
is now wasting 86 % of its available energy resources [2].2 With a similar level of
energy intensity as the U.S. now maintains, the world economy is an anemic 14 %
energy efficient. Drawing from the international energy statistics published by the
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) [4], the working estimate for
Europe and Japan suggests that they are only marginally better at 18–20 % energyefficient. That means, they continue to waste as much as 80–82 % of all the energy
that that they consume.
Because of that very significant level of inefficiency around the world, many in
the business and the policy community increasingly look to energy efficiency
improvements as cost-effective investments to reduce waste and cut costs. One
current example of this win–win opportunity is the advent of energy service
companies (ESCO’s) that save energy for clients, but at no upfront cost to the
clients, while making a profit for themselves. As an example, the International
Energy Agency (IEA) reports levels of ESCO spending that have grown from USD
1 billion in 2000 to USD 7 billion in 2011. This is an average annual growth rate of
20 %. Indeed, ESCOs are now active in close to 50 countries globally [5].
Perhaps more interesting, according to the IEA the annual routine investments
for building and industry energy efficiency improvements are up to USD 300
billion globally in 2011. The IEA indicates this magnitude of annual spending on
energy efficiency upgrades is at a scale that is similar to renewable energy and
fossil fuel power sector investments. The reduced energy demand stemming from
energy efficiency over the past decades is larger than any other single supply-side
energy source for a significant share of IEA member countries. This, the IEA
suggests, is driving energy efficiency to be our ‘‘first fuel’’ [5].

1

The mentioned examples of energy expenditures are derived from several calculations by the
author.
2
Laitner [2] builds on an updates work published by Ayres and War [3].

The Energy Efficiency Benefits and the Economic Imperative …

39

2 Historical Impact of Energy Efficiency
In many ways energy efficiency has been a continuing but also a seemingly
invisible resource. Unlike a new power plant or a new oil well, we do not see
energy efficiency immediately at work. A new car that uses 9.4 l per 100 km
(25 miles per gallon), for example, may not seem all that much different than a car
that requires only 4.7 l/100 km (50 miles per gallon). And yet, the first car may
consume *250 gallons of gasoline to go 10,000 km in a single year while the
second car, depending on how it is driven, may need only half that amount.
In effect, energy efficiency in this example is the energy we do not use to travel
10,000 km per year. More broadly, energy efficiency may be thought of as the
cost-effective investments in the energy we do not use either to produce some
amount goods and services within the economy. Within that context we can ask
how energy efficiency might compare to conventional energy resources.
Comparing economic activity over the period 1970 through 2010, the size of the
global economy grew by about 3.9 times. Energy use, on the other hand, grew by
only 2.4 times over that same period. In effect, the decoupling of economic growth
and energy consumption was the result of increased energy productivity: in short,
the ability to produce more goods and services, but doing so with less energy (and
other resources). In a complementary analysis by the author, using a variety of
IEA, EIA, and other available data, it appears that energy efficiency measures
provided about one-half of the new demand for energy-related energy services
over that 40-year time span. At the same time, analysis of 11 of the IEA member
countries for which suitable data are available, indicates that between 1974 and
2010, energy efficiency was the single largest new energy resource that was
brought online in that period (see Fig. 1).3
According to the IEA assessment, the avoided energy over the 36-year period
was equal to 65 % of the total final consumption of energy in 2010. Over this time
horizon, energy efficiency reduced growth in energy consumption to just 20 % of
the 1974 levels. Said differently, without energy efficiency improvements, energy
consumption would have increased by 93 %.
Having achieved these past gains, with an often ad hoc approach to energy
efficiency improvements, there is compelling evidence to suggest that even greater
energy productivity benefits can be achieved. Moreover, the evidence suggests that
significant gains are not only possible, but they will be cost-effective as well. And
as we shall see, ICT can be a critical part of the story.

3

The 11 countries are Australia, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States. Estimated energy use is
calculated on the basis of how much energy would have been required to deliver the actual levels
of activity reported each year for all sub-sectors had 1974 levels of energy use per unit of output
persisted. ‘‘Other’’ includes biofuels plus heat from geothermal, solar, co-generation and district
heating. Co-generation refers to the combined production of heat and power.

J.A.S. Laitner
70

1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0

Exajoules

60
50
40

30
20
10
0
Oil

Electricity

Gas

Coal

Other

Mtoe

40

Avoided
Energy
Use

Fig. 1 The ‘‘first fuel’’: contribution of energy efficiency compared to other energy resources
consumed in 2010 in 11 IEA member countries. Source IEA [5]

3 Cost-Effective Potential for Exploiting the Energy
Efficiency Resource
Can the substantial investments that might be required in the more energy-efficient
technologies save money for businesses and consumers? The Efficient World
Scenario of the IEA World Energy Outlook 2012 indicates that should policies
remove market barriers and promote cost-effective energy efficiency measures, total
primary energy supply could be reduced by an additional 900 million tonnes of oil
(Mtoe) in 2020 beyond those reductions generated from current and announced
policy interventions. This additional 900 Mtoe in avoided energy is equivalent to
7 % of 2010 global consumption, greater than the combined energy supply of
Australia, Japan, Korea and New Zealand today. If achieved it would produce a
corresponding reduction of USD 458 billion in consumer energy expenditures [6].
Lazard Asset Management [7] provides a detailed review of the various costs
associated with electricity generation. They note, for instance, that meeting new
energy demand by building new coal and nuclear power plants might cost an
average of 6–15 cents per kWh of electricity generated. The costs for various
renewable energy resources such as wind energy or photovoltaic energy systems
(i.e. solar cells that convert sunlight directly into electricity) might range from 6 to
20 cents per kWh. In comparison, both Lazard and the American Council for an
Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE) estimate a range of energy efficiency measures that might cost the equivalent of 3–5 cents per kWh of electricity service [8].
McKinsey and Company [9] in 2008 identified investments in energy efficiency
that would generate at least a 10 % annual return. When spread out over time,
McKinsey suggested a global energy efficiency market on the order of USD 170
billion per year with an average 17 % return. A subsequent McKinsey assessment
stated that ‘‘energy efficiency offers a vast, low cost energy resource’’ in the United
States [10]. If executed at scale, a holistic approach would yield energy savings
worth more than USD 1,200 billion, well above the USD 520 billion needed
through 2020 for upfront investment in energy efficiency measures. This is a
sufficient cost-effective opportunity to reduce the nation’s energy use in 2020 by

The Energy Efficiency Benefits and the Economic Imperative …

41

roughly 23 % from business as usual projections—should the U.S. choose to invest
in the more efficient use of its energy resources.
Such investments can deliver dramatic reductions in pollution. The Union of
Concerned Scientists [11] recently published a detailed portfolio of technology and
program options that would lower U.S. heat-trapping greenhouse gas emissions
56 % below 2005 levels in 2030. Their analysis indicated an annual USD 414
billion savings for U.S. households, vehicle owners, businesses, and industries by
2030. After subtracting out the annual USD 160 billion costs of the various policy
and technology options, the net savings are on the order of USD 255 billion per
year. Over the entire 2010 through 2030 study period, the net cumulative savings
to consumers and businesses were calculated to be on the order of USD 1,700
billion under their recommended scenario (with all values in 2006 dollars).
More recently, Laitner et al. [12] documented an array of untapped, costeffective energy efficiency resources roughly equivalent to 250 billion barrels of
oil. That is a sufficient scale to enable the United States to cut total energy needs in
half compared to business-as-usual projections for the year 2050. Capturing this
energy efficiency resource could generate from 1.3 to 1.9 million jobs while saving
all residential and business consumers a net USD 400 billion per year, or the
equivalent of about USD 2,600 per household annually (in 2010 dollars).
At the international level, Copenhagen Economics [13] suggests that energy
efficiency improvements in buildings alone, throughout the European Union,
might lower total energy use by 8–12 % by 2030. This would require gross annual
investments of 41 billion euros to 78 billion euros per year, but those investments
would also deliver ongoing annual returns of 104 billion euros to 175 billion euros.
Pushing an innovation-led investment strategy, Nord-Pas de Calais, a former
coal-mining and still heavy industrial region of 4 million people in northern
France, accepted a Third Industrial Revolution Master Plan that, if successful,
would reduce final energy use by as much as 60 % by 2050. As the plan laid it out,
renewable energy technologies would power all remaining energy needs, also by
2050 [14]. The preliminary estimate of the total investment needed to drive the
energy efficiency/renewable energy transition is on the order of 210 billion euros
(in constant 2005 euros) over the period 2014–2050. This averages to a little more
than 6 billion euros per year, or about 5 % of the region’s GDP over that 37-year
period. The substantial economic returns to Nord-Pas de Calais—including both
the lower costs of energy and a more robust economy—would be about 1.7 times
the total cost of the upfront investment. And the combination of investments and
energy bill savings would generate an average 100,000 new jobs for that region
with as many as 165,000 new jobs by 2050. In other words, the improved productivity, supported by the Third Industrial Revolution Master Plan, would measurably strengthen the region’s overall economy.
There is a further aspect that merits a brief review—the non-energy benefits that
typically accrue to energy efficiency investments. When energy efficiency measures are implemented in the industrial, commercial, or residential settings, several
non-energy benefits such as maintenance cost savings and enhanced productivity
benefits can often result—in addition to the anticipated energy savings. The

42

J.A.S. Laitner

magnitude of non-energy benefits from energy efficiency measures is significant.
In one study of 52 industrial efficiency upgrades, all undertaken in separate
industrial facilities across a number of different countries, Worrell et al. [15] found
that the non-energy benefits were sufficiently large that they lowered the aggregate
simple payback for energy efficiency projects from 4.2 years to 1.9 years.
Another study for 81 separate industrial energy efficiency projects showed that
the simple payback from energy savings alone was less than 2 years, indicating
annual returns higher than 50 %. When non-energy benefits were factored into the
analysis, the simple payback fell to just under 1 year [16]. In residential buildings,
non-energy benefits have been estimated to represent between 10 and 50 % of
household energy savings [17]. Unfortunately, these non-energy benefits from
energy efficiency measures are often omitted from conventional performance
metrics. This leads, in turn, to overly modest payback calculations and an
imperfect understanding of the full benefit of additional efficiency investments.
With this backdrop we can return to the report by Copenhagen Economics
which actually decomposes the annual building energy efficiency benefits into a
broader category of impacts. They include reduced air pollution, improved health
benefits, and annual improvements of public finances as fewer long-term subsidies
are needed. In fact, Copenhagen Economics actually broke down the economic
returns—the previously referenced annual benefit to society of €104–175 billion in
2020—into those same three major categories: (i) €52–75 billion from lower
energy bills, (ii) at least €9–12 billion from the co-benefits of reduced outlay on
subsidies and reduced air pollution from energy production; and (iii) €42–88
billion in health benefits from improved indoor climate. If investments are continued after 2020, they noted, the annual benefits could be doubled by 2030.

4 The ICT Contribution
How might we think about the ICT-enabled contributions to the energy efficiency
potential? First, we might simply step back and imagine how much easier it might
be to move electrons around than to ship people or goods over long distances.
Or to move information that can be acted, but using less energy. Hence, the more
we can do to substitute the flow of information for goods that should lead to a
reduction in the use of energy and materials. As an example, Cisco estimates there
will be the very large sum of 830 exabytes of data that will flow through a variety
of communication tools in 2014 [18]. Adding up all the incredibly light electrons
that will be needed to hold all those bits of information in place, we might suggest
a weight of only 3.4 millionths of an ounce. Yet, if we printed all of that information on paper, it might require, instead, more like 165 billion tons of paper.4

4

As a further insight, the 830 exabytes will be up significantly from 523 exabytes recorded in
2012, and heading for 1,448 exabytes or 1.4 zettabytes by 2017. That will translate into an
average annual compound growth rate of 23 % over the period 2012–2017 [18].

The Energy Efficiency Benefits and the Economic Imperative …

43

Many of the assessments to date tend to focus on the direct energy requirements
associated with different aspects of ICT-enabled systems. Coroama and Hilty [19],
for example, provide a thoughtful overview of studies along these lines. As they
properly note, assessing ‘‘the average energy intensity of Internet transmissions is
a complex task that has been a controversial subject of discussion.’’ They document estimates published over the last decade ‘‘which diverge by up to four orders
of magnitude—from 0.0064 to 136 kWh/GB’’ [19].5
Laitner et al. [22], on the other hand, note that energy intensity appears to be
coming down as projected by the EIA’s Annual Energy Outlook. Looking at the
year 2030, as an example, the Annual Energy Outlook 2008 was forecasting that,
in the United States, ICT-related activities might require 8.6 % of all electricity
needs in that year. In the most recent 2014 projections, however, total demands in
2030 are down to just 2.8 %—even as total electricity consumption itself is now
forecast to be 11 % lower than was previously estimated for 2030. The former
reduction appears to be related to greater efficiencies in the equipment while the
latter impact may be a greater rate of unexpected efficiency gains. That, of course,
may well be driven, in turn, by the so-called substitution effect—or substituting the
greater uses of electronics and ICT technologies and networks for primary energy.6
Evidence of this latter impact comes from a report sponsored by the Global-e
Sustainability Initiative (GeSI). In 2012 Laitner, Partridge, and Vittore [23]
explored the micro-level of energy efficiency associated with increased adoption of
ICT and broadband services at the residential level. They examined eight consumer activities enabled by the development of broadband technology: telecommuting, use of the Internet as a primary news source, downloading video/music,
online banking, online auctions/purchases, online education, use of digital photography, and use of e-mail. Assuming an upper end of reasonable adoption of all
eight residential activities, the study found the U.S. could generate an annual net
energy savings of about 336 million barrels of oil, equivalent to 2 % of total U.S.
energy consumption. In a comparable finding, the five EU nations of France,
Germany, Italy, Spain and the U.K would be able to save an annual net energy
savings of 164 million barrels of oil, equivalent to 2 % of total energy consumption in those countries.7
While primarily focused on reducing greenhouse gas emissions, two complementary GeSI studies point the way to significant gains in energy efficiency.
In 2008 the Global e-Sustainability Initiative (GeSI) demonstrated how ICT is
making the world’s energy infrastructure more efficient and concluded that smart
grids, buildings and transport along with travel substitution could reduce global
5

An update on the state of research in Internet energy intensity is provided in two later chapters
of this book [20, 21].
6
The calculations in this paragraph exclude televisions and related equipment as among the
ICT-related technologies.
7
The emphasis here and elsewhere is on net energy savings. That is to say, the studies cited here
reflect both the energy necessary to build, operate and maintain ICT-related technologies as well
as the energy displaced by the use of those technologies.

44

Abatement potential by change lever
Abatement Potential (GtCO2e)

Fig. 2 Mechanisms of
greenhouse gas emissions
reductions. Source GeSI 2012
[25]

J.A.S. Laitner

4.7

9.1
2.4

0.5

1.5

Digitization & Data collection &
System
dematerialization communication integration

Process, activity,
Functional
optimization

Total

carbon emissions by a net 15 % and save up to €600 billion by 2020 [24]. Most
recently the GeSI Smarter 2020 study found that the total abatement potential of
ICT-enabled solutions in 2020 was about 9.1 gigatons of carbon dioxide equivalent
(GtCO2e), a savings of about 16.5 % of global GHG emissions by 2020. This is
roughly equivalent as USD 1.9 trillion in gross energy and fuel savings and a
savings of 21.6 billion barrels of oil [25]. Figure 2 shows the various mechanisms
that helped achieve the overall savings.
Digitization and dematerialization, relying primarily on existing technologies
that substitute or eliminate the need for a carbon intensive product, were shown to
achieve 0.5 GtCO2e. The use of social media and networking (data collection
and communication) were shown to reduce emissions by 1.5 GtCO2e.8 Systems
integration—primarily building or industrial management systems and the use of
less-carbon intensive, renewable energy technologies—were shown to save 2.4
GtCO2e while the use of intelligent simulation, the automation of infrastructure,
and industrial processes more broadly, were shown to save 4.7 GtCO2e.
Using a top-down assessment, Laitner [28] reported that the deployment of
semiconductor-enabled technologies since 1976 generated a sufficient energy
productivity benefit across the entire U.S. economy to reduce total electricity
consumption by 20 % compared to an economy without the benefit of those
technologies. In other words, the family of semiconductor technologies now at
work within the economy appears to have amplified the productivity of buildings
and equipment, labor, and energy resources well beyond normally expected
returns.

8

Related to the social media and networking mechanism is the role of consumer feedback. In a
2010 detailed review of 57 multi-continent studies over a 30-year period, Ehrhardt-Martinez et al.
[26] showed that feedback initiatives—including real-time Web-based or in-home feedback
devices and enhanced billing approaches–reduced individual household electricity consumption
an average 4–12 %. Huber and Hilty [27] provide a brief overview of eco-feedback systems and
related approaches in their chapter about gamification in this volume.

The Energy Efficiency Benefits and the Economic Imperative …

45

Although the impact of energy productivity has been significant, a further
analysis indicated that a policy-driven semiconductor-enabled efficiency scenario
(SEES) might stimulate an average annual investment of about USD 22.5 billion
over the period from 2010 through 2030. More interesting, the findings also
suggested an average electricity bill savings on the order of USD 61 billion during
that same period of analysis. Even if the assessment includes program and
administration costs necessary to drive that result, the net savings were still more
than twice the total cost of the scenario. Perhaps an even more compelling outcome is the impact on employment. The working analysis suggested that, because
energy-related expenditures are so much less labor intensive than almost all other
consumer expenditures within the economy, the energy bill savings would support
a net increase of about 553,000 jobs over that same 20-year period. This suggests
an important additional benefit from the deployment of ICT-related technologies.

5 Overcoming Barriers to Improving Energy Efficiency
There is a range of market imperfections, market barriers, and real world behaviors
that leaves substantial room for public policy to induce behavioral changes that
produce economic benefits. One classic example is the misaligned incentive that
exists for those living in rental units when the renter pays the energy bills but the
landlord purchases the large appliances such as refrigerators and water heaters.
In this case, the purchaser of the durable good does not reap the benefits of greater
energy efficiency. The Market Advisory Committee of the California Air
Resources Board [29] provides a nice short overview of key market failures.9
A deeper exploration of the types of market barriers is beyond the scope of this
paper, but others have done work to map this terrain [30–35].
The importance of reflecting policies that might be directed at market failures was
explored, in part, by Hanson and Laitner. In one of the few top-down models that
explicitly reflects both policies and behavioral changes as a complement to pricing
signals, they found that the combination of both price and non-pricing policies (e.g.,
performance standards, eco-labeling, and product information more broadly)

9

Following are examples of three important market failures and suggested remedies: (1) stepchange technology development in which there may be many uncertainties about appropriate
technologies, as well as both market, and policy risks. Temporary incentives might be used to
encourage companies to deploy new technologies at sufficient scale in ways that benefit the public
good. Other remedies might include energy efficiency resource standards, energy or fuel
performance standards and low-carbon fuel standards. (2) Fragmented supply chains—where
economically rational investments (for example, energy efficiency in buildings) are not executed
because of the complex supply chain. Examples of remedies are building codes or incentives for
performance upgrades. (3) Consumer behavior where individuals have demonstrated high
discount rates for investments in energy efficiency. Examples of remedies are vehicle and
appliance efficiency standards and rebate programs [29].

46

J.A.S. Laitner

actually resulted in a significantly greater level of energy efficiency gains and a lower
carbon permit price to achieve the same level of emissions reductions [36].
One critical comment on the rebound effect may be appropriate at this point.10
Lower energy prices and a positive income effect are likely to follow these energy
efficiency improvements. These, in turn, may erode some of the net energy savings
as lower prices and a slightly higher income encourage more energy use. But as
Ehrhardt-Martinez and Laitner point out [38], this rebound effect is likely to be
limited to 10–30 % of the initial energy savings in the short term. Moreover, just
as we learn how to manage efficiency improvements, we can also learn over time
how to mitigate the rebound effect with improved resource management strategies
and people-centered energy initiatives. On balance, the net ICT energy savings and
benefits are likely to remain significant—if we choose to pursue the full set of
energy efficiency opportunities.

References
1. Emerson, R.W.: The American scholar. In: Nature Addresses and Lectures, vol. 1, pp. 81–84.
Wm. H. Wise 1923, New York (1837)
2. Laitner, J.A.S.: Linking energy efficiency to economic productivity: recommendations for
improving the robustness of the U.S. economy. ACEEE Report E13F. American Council for
an Energy-Efficient Economy, Washington, D.C.
3. Ayres, R.U., Warr, B.S.: The Economic Growth Engine: How Energy and Work Drive
Material Prosperity. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham (2009)
4. EIA: United States Energy Information Administration: International Energy Statistics. U.S.
Department of Energy, Washington, D.C. (2013) http://www.eia.gov/cfapps/ipdbproject/
iedindex3.cfm. Accessed 31 May 2014
5. International Energy Agency: Energy Efficiency Market Report. OECD/IEA, Paris (2013)
6. International Energy Agency: World Energy Outlook. OECD/IEA, Paris (2012)
7. Lazard Asset Management: Lazard’s Levelized Cost of Energy Analysis: Version 7.0.
Lazard, Ltd, New York (2013)
8. Elliott, R.N., Gold, R., Hayes, S.: Avoiding a Train Wreck: Replacing Old Coal Plants with
Energy Efficiency. American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, Washington, D.C.
(2011)
9. McKinsey & Company: The Case for Investing in Energy Productivity (2008). http://www.
mckinsey.com/insights/energy_resources_materials/the_case_for_investing_in_energy_
productivity. Accessed 31 May 2014
10. McKinsey & Company: Unlocking Energy Efficiency in the U.S. Economy. McKinsey &
Company (2009) http://www.mckinsey.com/client_service/electric_power_and_natural_gas/
latest_thinking/unlocking_energy_efficiency_in_the_us_economy. Accessed 31 May 2014
11. Cleetus, R., Clemmer, S., Friedman, D.: Climate 2030: A National Blueprint for a Clean
Energy Economy. Union of Concerned Scientists, Cambridge (2009)
12. Laitner, J.A.S., Nadel, S., Elliott, N., Sachs, H., Khan, S.: The Long-term Energy Efficiency
Potential: What the Evidence Suggests. American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy
(ACEEE), Washington, D.C. (2012)

10

Gossart [37] provides an overview of the literature on rebound effects in an ICT context later
in this volume.

