The Energy Intensity of the Internet:
Home and Access Networks
Vlad C. Coroama, Daniel Schien, Chris Preist and Lorenz M. Hilty

Abstract Estimates of the energy intensity of the Internet diverge by several
orders of magnitude. We present existing assessments and identify diverging
definitions of the system boundary as the main reason for this large spread. The
decision of whether or not to include end devices influences the result by 1–2
orders of magnitude. If end devices are excluded, customer premises equipment
(CPE) and access networks have a dominant influence. Of less influence is the
consideration of cooling equipment and other overhead, redundancy equipment,
and the amplifiers in the optical fibers. We argue against the inclusion of end
devices when assessing the energy intensity of the Internet, but in favor of
including CPE, access networks, redundancy equipment, cooling and other overhead as well as optical fibers. We further show that the intensities of the metro and
core network are best modeled as energy per data, while the intensity of CPE and
access networks are best modeled as energy per time (i.e., power), making overall
assessments challenging. The chapter concludes with a formula for the energy
intensity of CPE and access networks. The formula is presented both in generic
form as well as with concrete estimates of the average case to be used in quick
assessments by practitioners. The next chapter develops a similar formula for the

V.C. Coroama (&)
Measure-IT Research, Bucharest, Romania
e-mail: vlad.coroama@measureit-research.eu
D. Schien  C. Preist
Department of Computer Science, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
L.M. Hilty
Department of Informatics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Empa, Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology,
St. Gallen, Switzerland
Centre for Sustainable Communications CESC, KTH Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm, Sweden
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
L.M. Hilty and B. Aebischer (eds.), ICT Innovations for Sustainability,
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 310,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09228-7_8

137

138

V.C. Coroama et al.

core and edge networks. Taken together, the two chapters provide an assessment
method of the Internet’s energy intensity that takes into account different modeling
paradigms for different parts of the network.



Keywords Internet Energy intensity
equipment Access network



 Energy efficiency  Customer premises

1 Introduction
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) are increasingly perceived as
enablers of a reduction of anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Studies
providing evidence for this enabling effect come not only from academia [1–3],
but also from organizations as diverse as ICT industry associations [4], the
European Commission [5], and the World Wildlife Fund [6]. Reductions are
usually estimated based on quantitative scenarios [7], yielding an abatement
potential which has to be adjusted downwards by an estimate of the ICT applications own footprint to calculate the net effect.
ICT can reduce energy consumption and related GHG emissions through three
mechanisms: (i) from optimization effects in domains such as smart engines,
buildings, or logistics, (ii) due to ICT-supported novel paradigms for the generation and distribution of electricity (i.e., smart grids), and (iii) due to substitution
effects in which information and communication services partly replace other more
energy-intensive activities [4, 8].
Two problems must be solved to quantify the net effect of ICT applications in
these cases: First, the energy savings induced by ICT must be assessed. As we
argue in [9] and [10], this is methodologically challenging: The baseline scenario,
among other factors, as it expands into the future, is inherently speculative.
Moreover, allocation issues are raised by the fact that ICT typically does not
induce efficiency on its own, but only in a suitable technological, political, or
organizational context. Secondly, the energy consumption of the ICT solution
involved must be determined. This is also technically challenging, and existing
literature reports diverse results. The current and the subsequent chapter explore
this issue, with a particular focus on Internet services.
The energy intensity of the Internet, expressed as energy consumed to transmit a
given volume of data, is one of the most controversial issues. Existing studies of
the Internet energy intensity give results ranging from 136 kWh/GB [11] down to
0.0064 kWh/GB [12], a factor of more than 20,000. Whether and to what extent it
is more energy efficient to download a movie rather than buying the DVD, for
example, or more sustainable to meet via videoconference instead of travelling to a
face-to-face meeting are questions that cannot be satisfyingly answered with such
diverging estimates of the substitute’s impact.
The Internet’s energy consumption, and the energy intensity of the Internet as a
suitable metric, are the topics of both the current chapter and the next one. The

The Energy Intensity of the Internet …

139

current chapter presents a review of existing studies and provides explanations for
the large spread in their results. The chapter then recommends a definition of the
system boundary that is most useful for decision-making and concludes by
zooming in on the peripheral parts of the network and assessing their contribution
to the energy intensity of the Internet. Chapter 9 [13] will focus on the remaining
components, i.e., the core of the Internet.

2 Definitions and System Boundaries
In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the term Internet literally indicated the interconnection of a small number of local area networks on university campuses; back
then, ‘‘the Internet’’ comprised a few routers and cables. Today, the Internet is the
vast and heterogeneous infrastructure connecting billions of computers worldwide
using the TCP/IP family of communication protocols. The majority of these
computers belong to private users who connect to the Internet through their
Internet service provider (ISP).
Figure 1 presents a high-level structure of the Internet. We comment only
briefly on this structure here; more detailed discussions can be found in the following chapter in Sect. 2.1, and in the network models presented by Baliga et al.
and Hinton et al. [14, 15]. Users’ devices (such as desktop, laptop or tablet PCs and
smartphones) connect through what is referred to as customer premises equipment
(CPE), which are mainly WiFi routers and modems, to their ISP. The ISP bundles
the data from several users in multiplexers. These vary depending on the
subscription technology; for the widely used DSL connectivity they are digital
subscriber line access multiplexers (DSLAM). Together with the cables connecting them to the CPE, these multiplexers constitute what is called the access
network. After passing through an edge router, the traffic enters the metro and core
parts of the Internet where routers with increasing capacities bundle the traffic.
On the other side, the traffic is decomposed according to its destination; a large
part is directed to data centers, while a smaller part is directed to other users
(not represented in Fig. 1).
First attempts to understand the energy consumption of this distributed and
heterogeneous power-consumption system were undertaken a decade ago, in
2003–2004. Starting from statistical data and studies on the ICT equipment in use,
both [16] and [11] estimated the yearly power consumption of the Internet in the
US. Dividing this value by an estimate of the US Internet traffic for that year
resulted in estimates of the energy intensity of the Internet, i.e., the energy consumed throughout the Internet per amount of data transferred.
The two studies differed in their definition of what constitutes the Internet.
While [16] considered only networking equipment (i.e., Ethernet hubs, LAN and
WAN switches in offices and buildings, together with the routers of the Internet),
[11] also took into account devices in data centers such as servers or data storage
(see Fig. 1). As we discuss in more detail later, this definitional discrepancy across

140

V.C. Coroama et al.

This Chapter

Next Chapter
Long Haul
Router

Router

λ

λ

Provider
Edge

λ

λ

λ

λ

λ

Data Center

Metro

Metro

Access

Undersea

CPE

λ

Fiber Optic
Transmission
Ring Topology

λ

Fiber Optic
Transmission
Mesh Topology

Fig. 1 Model of the Internet structure

studies persists until today, and is one of the main causes for the large spread of the
published results.
Before going into detail, we note that we discuss estimates for direct energy
consumption in the form of electricity only. The energy supply chain (containing
the supply of primary energy, power plants transforming primary energy sources to
electricity, and grids bringing them to the consuming devices) is excluded from the
system under study. We also exclude the ‘‘grey’’ energy embedded in ICT hardware, although the material flows caused by producing and disposing of hardware
are significant (see [17] and the chapter by Hischier et al. [18] later in this volume).
All studies that will be discussed apply an average allocation rule, distributing
the equipment energy consumption evenly among the total traffic volume over a
certain period of time. We found no study focusing on marginal instead of average
effects.

3 Existing Assessments and Methods Used
The two assessments mentioned above, [11] and [16], both used the same methodology: dividing an estimate of the overall US Internet energy consumption by
the estimated total Internet traffic in the US. Since then, several more studies used
the same approach, while other studies deployed different methodologies.
According to the basic methodological approach they use, existing studies can be
classified in two classes:
Top-down. According to [19], top-down analyses are based on two estimates: (1)
the overall energy demand of either the entire Internet or a part of it (e.g., a country
or a continent), and (2) the total Internet traffic of that region.
Bottom-up. By contrast, bottom-up approaches model parts of the Internet (i.e.,
deployed number of devices of each type) based on network design principles.
Such a model combined with manufacturers’ consumption data on typical network

The Energy Intensity of the Internet …

141

equipment leads to an estimate of the overall energy consumption [15], which is
then related to an estimate of the corresponding data traffic. Bottom-up studies can
also use direct observations made in one or more case studies. These provide
primary data on one or more of the following: deployed equipment, network
topology and routing, power consumption of specific devices, and data volume
passing through specific devices. Case studies present energy intensity values for
specific cases, typically followed by a discussion of how the results can be
generalized.

3.1 Top-Down Assessments
The earliest top-down assessments were introduced above: Gupta et al. published
their results in 2003 [16], and Koomey et al. in 2004 [11]. The two studies used the
same statistical inventory data on ICT equipment in commercial buildings in the
US for the year 2000 [20]. Despite building on the same inventory, they make
different assumptions as to which devices belong to the Internet and thus yield
distinct consumption results.
The assessment by Gupta et al. [16], taking into account Internet routers, WAN
and LAN switches as well as Ethernet hubs, yields a yearly energy consumption of
6.05 terawatt-hours per year (TWh/a) for all networking devices in the US. In
assessing the energy intensity of ‘‘the Internet’’ in the US, the study narrows the
focus even more. It leaves campus devices (i.e., LAN switches and hubs) outside
the calculation, and considers only the consumption of WAN switches and Internet
routers, estimated at just 1.25 TWh/a in 2000.
Koomey et al. [11], on the other hand, consider not only the campus networking
devices, but also data center devices—servers (10.2 TWh/a) and data storage
(1.5 TWh/a)—as well as uninterruptible power supplies (5.8 TWh/a), leading to a
total of 23.65 TWh/a. Furthermore, they multiply this result by 2 to account for
overhead such as cooling and ventilation, leading to a total of 47 TWh/a, 37 times
higher than the value in [16].
The two studies also use an identical source to estimate the US Internet traffic:
data from the Minnesota Internet Traffic Studies (MINTS) by Andrew Odlyzko
and colleagues. These data, published e.g. in [21], estimate a US Internet traffic in
2000 of 20,000–35,000 TB/month. Using the same traffic data, and consumption
data different by a factor of 37, one could expect from the two studies energy
intensity results differing by the same factor 37. This, however, is not the case.
Koomey et al. [11] use the lower end of the Internet traffic data from [21] but
complement it with traffic on other public data networks and private lines, leading
to a total traffic of 348,000 terabyte per year (TB/a). The study thus yields an
energy intensity of 136 kWh/GB (kilowatt-hours per Gigabyte) [11]. As for the
other study, we can only speculate that Gupta et al. [16] misinterpreted the data in
[21] as yearly instead of monthly traffic values. The study thus calculates with the
range of 20,000–35,000 TB/a, which leads to an energy intensity of 0.128–0.225
Joule/Byte, or 38–67 kWh/GB. The correct energy intensity for the system

142

V.C. Coroama et al.

boundaries used by [16], however, should have been twelve times lower because
the yearly traffic estimate was actually twelve times higher. The corrected values
for [16] are 3.2–5.6 kWh/GB (see Table 1).
An update for Koomey et al. [11] was published a few years later. The new
assessment by Taylor and Koomey [22] referred to the year 2006. Estimating again
the US Internet energy consumption and using three existing estimates of the US
Internet traffic per year, the new study yielded as result the range 8.8–24.3 kWh/
GB [22]. This 2006 estimate was yet again updated for the year 2008 in an article
by Weber et al. [23]. For this period, the authors assumed that total Internet traffic
increased by 50 % per year, and that total Internet electricity use grew at a yearly
rate of 14 %, which had been the average global growth rate of data center
electricity use between 2000 and 2005. These assumptions resulted in an average
Internet electricity intensity of about 7 kWh/GB for 2008 [23].
The study by Lanzisera et al. [24] is another well-known top-down estimate.
The analysis only includes networking equipment, excluding not only end devices
but also the transmission lines. Estimating the total of both the US and the world
networking equipment stock for 2008, the power of each device and their individual usage patterns, the article computed an annual electricity consumption of
18 TWh for all networking equipment in the US and of 50.8 TWh for the world.
The study did not relate this consumption to traffic values to compute the Internet
energy intensity. To make the result comparable with other studies, we divide it by
an estimate for Internet data traffic for 2008 in order to calculate the energy
intensity. According to Cisco’s ‘‘Visual Networking Index’’, ‘‘global IP traffic
grew 45 % during 2009 to reach an annual run rate of 176 exabytes per year’’ [25].
We therefore assume a traffic volume of 121 exabytes (EB) for 2008. Using this
value as a worldwide traffic estimate for 2008 yields an energy intensity of
0.39 kWh/GB for the world average.

3.2 Bottom-Up Assessments
The model-based approach has been used by Kerry Hinton’s research group at the
University of Melbourne [12, 14, 15, 26, 27], as well as in [28] and [29]. Some of
these studies are not directly comparable to the results of top-down assessments
because they have different focuses such as analyzing only a part of the Internet
transmission (e.g., [27]) or analyzing the Internet power consumption per subscriber and not per amount of data [26]. A few of these results may, nevertheless,
be adapted to be made compatible with studies on Internet energy intensity. As we
present in detail in [30], the very first assessment from the Melbourne group [26]
yields an Internet energy intensity of 0.91-2.52 kWh/GB, depending on the
estimate of worldwide Internet traffic used.
Baliga et al. [14] provides a direct estimate of the energy intensity of Internet
data transmission: 75 lJ/bit (micro-Joule per bit), equal to 0.179 kWh/GB, at the

The Energy Intensity of the Internet …

143

access rates typical of 2008. As the authors point out, their result represents a
lower bound or optimistic estimate in terms of energy consumption, because the
model assumes only state-of-the-art equipment and ignores the fact that less
energy-efficient legacy network equipment is still in use. They further state that
they expect this energy intensity to drop in the near future to 2–4 lJ/bit with
increasing access rates.
Baliga et al. [12] puts forward a value of 2.7 lJ/bit. This value corresponds to
0.0064 kWh/GB and represents the lowest value published thus far. This study,
however, aimed to compare the energy demand of traditional computing with that
of cloud computing. As the energy consumption of the access network is largely
independent of the traffic and would leave the result untouched, the authors
legitimately ignored it: ‘‘The access network does not influence the comparison
between conventional computing and cloud computing. Therefore, it is omitted
from consideration and is not included in our calculations of energy consumption’’
[12]. While this assumption stands to reason within the scope of the study, it can
lead to misinterpretation if taken out of context, as we will discuss in the next
section.
Finally, Schien et al. [29] used a network model to analyze the download of the
UK newspaper ‘‘The Guardian,’’ as well as the download of a 640 s video from the
Guardian’s video section. The newspaper’s html homepage was located on a server
within the UK, while video and images were outsourced to a Content Distribution
Network (CDN) and mirrored on several continents within the CDN’s network.
Downloads from clients in Oceania, North America, and Europe were studied.
Results showed that because of the CDN architecture, geographical distance
played only a minor role; the energy intensities of the downloads from different
continents were similar. For both the homepage and the video, the intensity was
8–9J/mbit (Joules per megabit), which corresponds to approximately 0.02 kWh/
GB. The study, while considering access, metro, and core parts of the Internet, did
not account for the CPE.
In [31], this work was extended to include CPE and end devices, and to explore
uncertainty and variability in assessments of digital services. In contrast to this
chapter and to [30], which try to represent the existing variability in previous
assessments, [31] estimates how uncertainty in energy intensity affects the overall
result. Combining earlier results in a triangular distribution, the study arrived at a
mean energy intensity for metro and core networks of 0.038 kWh/GB. For access
network and CPE together, and excluding end devices, it provided a mean energy
estimate of 0.019 kWh/GB.
In [32], Coroamă and Hilty present an assessment of a 40 Mbps (megabit per
second) videoconferencing transmission of the case study introduced in [33]. For
a system boundary that included network devices and optical fibers but no end
devices, and making pessimistic assumptions in terms of energy consumption
where specific data were not available, the study yielded an energy intensity of

144

V.C. Coroama et al.

Table 1 Estimates of the energy demand of Internet transmissions
Study

Method

System boundary
CPE Access Core

Links

DCs

Data on
[year]

Energy
intensity
[kWh/GB]

[16]

Topdown

–

–

X

–

–

2000

38–67

[16],
corrected
[11]

–

–

X

–

–

2000

3.2–5.6

–

–

X

X

X

2000

136

–

X

X

X

X

2006

8.8–24.3

–

X

X

X

X

2008

7

X

X

X

–

–

2008

0.39

[26]

Topdown
Topdown
Topdown
Topdown
Topdown
Model

–

X

X

X

–

2007

0.7–2.1

[14]

Model

X

X

X

X

–

2008

[0.179

[12]

Model

X

–

X

X

–

2011

0.006

[29]

Model

–

X

X

X

–

2009

0.02

[22]
[23]
[24]

[31]

MetaX
X
X
X
–
0.057
2009
analysis
[32]
Case
X
X
X
X
–
\0.2
2009
study
The columns below ‘‘system boundary’’ show which parts of the Internet and of the end devices (as
introduced in Fig. 1) were accounted for by the individual studies. CPE is the customer premises
equipment. Core stands for the metro and long haul Internet together—all studies consider both of
them. Links are the optical transmission lines, and DCs stands for the equipment in data centers

0.2 kWh/GB for 2009. As we argued in [32], many characteristics of the study
(such as an above-average number of hops) justify considering its result aboveaverage in terms of energy intensity. This implies that the case-study result,
when generalized, should be considered an upper bound for the average energy
intensity.
The setting of this case study was such that no CPE or access network was
distinguishable. The conference was held between a large conference center in
Switzerland and a university campus in Japan. Both sites were directly connected
to the metro network in the same way that Fig. 1 depicts data centers. Yet, the
edge routers on each side of the connection behaved similarly as CPE and the
access network behave in the typical setting: they had a low load far from their
capacity, and with an energy consumption that had to be allocated entirely or to a
large extent to the case study.

The Energy Intensity of the Internet …

145

4 Factors Influencing the Results
Results of the surveyed studies span a very wide range: from the 136 kWh/GB of
[11] down to the 0.006 kWh/GB from [12], there is a spread of four orders of
magnitude. In this section, we show how the distinct assumptions about the system
boundary and further factors affected the results of the individual studies.
Table 1 summarizes the characteristics and the results of the studies presented.
Special emphasis is given to their system boundaries. Our analysis revealed the
following factors to be the most important influences on the result:
•
•
•
•

The reference year of the study,
the inclusion of data center devices within the system boundary,
the inclusion of customer premises equipment and access network, and
the inclusion of overheads such as cooling and redundancy equipment.

Each influencing factor is discussed in the following subsections.
Reference Year. An important part of the large differences can be explained by
the year of reference of the individual studies, ranging from 2000 [11, 16] to 2011
[12]. The ICT sector is characterized by fast innovation cycles, and the equipment
is becoming ever more energy efficient, needing less energy per amount of data
being processed or transmitted. Taking [22]‘s estimate that the energy intensity of
the Internet decreases by 30 % each year, this technological progress alone leads
to a reduction by a factor of 50 over the period of 11 years covered by the studies.
System Boundary: Data Centers. The most important determining factor is the
system boundary, in particular, whether or not data center devices (i.e., data
storage and server-type devices running in server rooms or data centers) are
viewed as part of the Internet. This decision has a large impact on the result: As
shown in Table 1, for 2008, which is referred to by several studies, the two studies
not including data centers result in energy intensities of 0.39 [24] and 0.179 kWh/
GB [14]—factors of 18 and 39 below the 7 kWh/GB of the study that includes data
centers [23], respectively.
The original statistical data from [20] (used by both [11] and [16]) supports this
observation. While the consumption of core Internet devices was estimated at just
1.25 TWh/a, the consumption of storage devices and servers together was estimated at 11.7 TWh/a.
System Boundary: CPE and Access Networks. From the equipment inventories
in [16] and [11] (presented in Table 1 of each paper), it is clear they do not consider
customer premises equipment or access networks. This stands to reason: both rely
on 2000 inventory data for ICT in US offices, not in homes. And the Internet had not
yet exploded, reaching every home as it does today. In 2000, ISPs, access networks,
and customers’ modems and routers were not nearly as prevalent or important as
they later quickly became. Taylor and Koomey [22] and Weber et al. [23], on the
other hand, explicitly include access networks and exclude CPE. Most of the other

146

V.C. Coroama et al.

Fig. 2 Cumulated power demand for the videoconference case study [33] along a distance of
27,000 km. The power demand of local network components, albeit relatively small, is allocated
to a relevant extent to the case study’s traffic due to the low average load of the local components.
These local components therefore clearly dominate the overall power consumption of the
transmission. The large core Internet nodes and the transoceanic ‘‘data highways,’’ while utilizing
a relatively large amount of power, typically have a switching/transporting capacity on the order
of hundreds of GB/s, or even TB/s. Their contribution to the overall demand amounts to less than
1 Watt/Mbps in the case study. By contrast, the power demand of transcontinental links does
contribute significantly to the overall consumption, due to their relatively low bandwidths

studies account for both, except [27] and [29] which do not include CPE in their
assessment and [12] which does not consider the access network.
Not considering CPE or access networks, however, has a great impact on the
result. When the otherwise dominating data centers are excluded from the calculation, numerous studies point out that CPE and access networks dominate the
energy intensity of the Internet over core and metro networks. Figure 2, for example,
shows the cumulated power consumption of the case study presented in [32]. The
peripheral parts of the network clearly dominate the overall power consumption.
Both [14] and [15] also point out that for the peak access rates typical of 2008
and 2010, respectively, access networks dominate the power consumption of the
Internet. Core and metro networks would become the dominating part only if
access rates were to grow extensively and reach peak access rates in excess of
100 Mbps (for the energy efficiency of 2010 networking technology). For networking technology that becomes more efficient along the foreseeable trends,
typical peak access rates would have to be over 1 Gbps for the core and metro
networks to surpass the power consumption of the access networks. For the
moment, as typical access rates are much lower, access networks use more energy
than the core of the Internet and their exclusion profoundly changes the result.
The consumption of customer premises equipment is within the same order of
magnitude as the access network but, as a general tendency, is slightly higher:

The Energy Intensity of the Internet …

147

according to [14], the access network needs 2.8 W of power, while the CPE needs
between 4–10 W, depending on the technology used. Schien et al. [31] calculate
with 2 W per subscriber for the DSLAM of the access network and with 10 W for
the CPE (5 W for the modem and another 5 W for the WiFi router). As with the
access network, the decision of whether or not to include the CPE decisively
influences the result.
Overheads: Cooling and Redundancy Equipment. The facilities (rooms,
buildings) hosting ICT networking equipment and datacenters induce a power
overhead due to non ICT-related consumption such as cooling or lighting. The
measure widely used to account for this consumption is the Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE). The PUE is computed as a facility’s total power divided by the
power needed to run the ICT equipment only [34]. As the former includes the
latter, the PUE is larger than, or equal to, 1. The closer the PUE is to 1, the less
power is ‘‘wasted’’ for activities other than information processing. The average
PUE for datacenters nowadays is slightly lower than 2 [35] with a decreasing
tendency; for Internet routers it was around 1.7 in 2009 [36]. Most studies do
consider a PUE between 1.78 [29] and 2 [12, 14, 26, 32] in their calculations.
Notable exceptions are [16] and [24] that do not account for the PUE, i.e., they
present results one would obtain for a PUE = 1.
Another overhead is induced by redundancy devices. Referring to routers, [31]
notes that ‘‘devices are operated with at least dual redundancy in order to cope
with failure’’. Baliga et al. [14], too, notes that a minimum of two uplinks are used
for redundancy in metro and core networks. Several of the bottom-up studies (both
model-based and case studies) account for the redundancy equipment via a
redundancy factor of 2 [12, 14, 29, 31, 32].

5 Discussion
As the system boundary plays such a decisive influence on the end result, this
section discusses possible best practices in defining the system boundary of the
Internet for energy-related studies. It then shows how the access network and CPE
differ from the more central parts of the network, and concludes with an assessment of the energy intensity of the former.

5.1 System Boundary
End Devices. Coroama and Hilty [30] argue extensively against the inclusion of
end devices (both user end devices such as personal or laptop computers, as well as
servers and storage in data centers) within the system boundary for the energy
intensity of the Internet. As we have shown above for data centers, including such
devices can dramatically change the results. This, however, is inadequate not only

148

V.C. Coroama et al.

as a matter of semantics; The concept of the Internet by definition does not include
end devices but only the infrastructure connecting them. There are also practical
arguments against including end devices, since that would yield results ill-suited
and potentially misleading on most questions:
• The consumption in access, metro and core networks is largely independent of
both the end devices and the application generating the traffic. Meaningful
averages can thus be defined and estimated. By contrast, end devices such as
desktop computers, smartphones or web servers have very different power
demands. Different applications imply different sets of end devices: web
browsing a server at a data center and a desktop, laptop or tablet computer;
peer-to-peer file exchange two computers; and high-end videoconferencing two
large LCD screens in combination with codec devices.
• Moreover, even for identical devices at both ends, distinct applications can
induce very different consumption levels per amount of transferred data. While
a peer-to-peer file exchange, for example, can use a bandwidth of several
Mbps, a Skype voice call gets by with a bandwidth of only 60 kbps. Assuming
exclusive usage of the two client devices, the low-bandwidth case induces a
much higher energy consumption per bit at the terminal nodes due to the low
utilization. This could lead to the seriously misleading conclusion that ‘‘the
Internet’’ uses more energy per amount of data for applications with lower
bandwidth demand, in this case for a Skype voice call, than for a highly
demanding file exchange.
Under these circumstances, with different devices and different applications
inducing varying consumption in the end devices, it is unclear how these consumption levels could be aggregated into meaningful averages. It seems more
meaningful always to assess network energy and the energy of end devices separately, and to add them up when needed—for example, for the assessment of the
energy needs of a specific service [32].
CPE and Access Networks. The consumption of customer premises equipment
and access networks, on the other hand, should always be considered. Unlike end
devices, these devices have no stand-alone meaning. They only exist to connect
end devices and thus semantically belong to the Internet.
Moreover, as shown in several studies [14, 15, 32], CPE and access network
dominate the energy consumption of the Internet over metro and core network.
Although this might not be true for services with a very high bandwidth usage (see
next chapter [13]) and might permanently change in the future with increasing access
rates [15], it is certainly the rule for the moment. It is advisable always to include these
factors, even if they make an equal contribution in the cases under scrutiny. Although
dropping such factors may simplify comparisons such as in [12], it will also change
the absolute values which, if taken out of context, may lead to misunderstandings.

The Energy Intensity of the Internet …

149

Overhead: PUE and Redundancy. The cooling and other types of overheads
included in the PUE, as well as the redundancy equipment, provide support or
safety functions in the Internet. Hence, their consumption should be accounted for.
As one of their few advantages over bottom-up assessments, top-down studies
inherently include the redundancy equipment, as this is included in the stock
inventories these are based on. Bottom-up analyses must account for them
explicitly—as mentioned above, a factor of 2 for redundancy and a factor of 1.7–2
for the PUE are the values most studies use.
It must be noted, however, that both PUE and redundancy only apply to access,
edge, metro and core equipment. CPE have no redundancy nor are they cooled.
Whether redundancy and overheads are considered thus has a relatively low
influence on end results that include CPE, and there is a risk of overestimation if
one includes redundancy and PUE for the CPE as well (as we did in [32]).
Fibers. Whether the power of the amplifiers along the fiber cables is considered
(as it is in most studies) or not (as in [16, 24]), also has only a marginal impact on
the result. The relatively high power of dozens of kilowatts of transoceanic fibers
gets divided by such a large amount of traffic that the contribution per amount of
data becomes negligible [32]. The consumption along fibers only becomes relevant
for fibers with a low load such as the US transcontinental links in [32]. Such a case
leads to a considerable allocation to relatively low amounts of traffic. Often,
however, this is not the case. [14] argues that ‘‘the core optical transport (wavelength division multiplexed links) accounts for only a small fraction of the total
energy consumed by the Internet’’. But even when relevant, the consumption along
the fibers was still smaller than the consumption of the access network [32].

5.2 The Challenge of Defining the Energy Intensity
of the Internet
A basic methodological problem with the energy intensity of the Internet is that for
some devices the energy consumption scales with the traffic volume and for other
devices it scales along different dimensions, especially time of usage [30, 31]. The
former is true of most networking devices in the metro and core network [31],
while the energy consumption of devices in the access network and CPE (as well
as end devices, which have been excluded from the analysis) usually scales with
the time of usage and is largely traffic-independent [27].
To account for these differences, [31] recommends allocating the energy consumption of a device based on an approach that takes into account the limiting
factor of the device—i.e., the factor that, if increased, would first limit the quality
of service. If the limiting factor is in practice very hard to reach, the approach
allocates energy according to the dimension that, if changed, results in the most
significant change in energy consumption [31]. For the overall network energy

150

V.C. Coroama et al.

intensity, [30] thus suggests using a combined approach that encompasses intensities defined as both energy per data and energy per time (i.e., power) where
appropriate. We will elaborate on this approach in Sect. 5.3.
Existing studies, however, do not differentiate between categories of devices
when defining a metric for the energy intensity. Instead, each study defines the
energy intensity for all devices along the same dimension: Most studies define the
network energy intensity as energy per amount of data [11, 16, 22, 23, 29, 32].
With a partial focus on CPE and access networks, [31] defines the energy intensity
for those devices as energy per time. Some studies with a focus on access networks, noting that access networks’ devices are always on and their consumption
is thus both traffic- and time-independent, define the energy intensity as energy per
subscriber [26, 27]. Finally, top-down studies can avoid the problem altogether by
computing only the overall energy of the Internet and not relating it to any other
dimension for a measurement of energy intensity (e.g., [24]).
We conclude this chapter by putting forward a formula for the computation of
the energy intensity of the access network and customer premises equipment. The
next chapter in this volume [13] addresses the metro and core networks, and
proposes a formula for the energy intensity of those parts of the Internet. That
energy intensity is defined as energy per data. Summing these two leads to the first
formula for the energy intensity of the Internet that combines an energy per time
component with an energy per data component and thus models reality more
closely than previous work.

5.3 The Energy Intensity of CPE and Access Networks
In this subsection, we develop the formula for the energy intensity of CPE and
access networks. We build on the analysis of [31], which analyzes the energy
consumption of online multimedia services. For the consumption in access networks
and CPE, that article puts forward the following formula (formula 9 in the article):

EAN ¼ ts

PCPE PTU
þ
PUENet
NCPE NTU


ð1Þ

where
• EAN is the energy consumption in the access network (including CPE in that
article’s terminology) for the consumption of a given service,
• tS the time of service consumption,
• PCPE and NCPE the power of all CPE taken together and the number of users
connected to them, respectively,
• PTU and NTU the power of the access network devices and the number of users
connected to them, respectively, and
• PUENet the PUE of the DSLAM, which typically requires cooling.

The Energy Intensity of the Internet …

151

We start from this formula to define the energy intensity per unit time (i.e.,
power) of customer premises equipment and access networks. For more clarity, we
consider access network and CPE separately and add them back together in the
end. As we are interested in the energy intensity and not the total amount of
energy, the time factor ts disappears. Additionally, the energy intensity of the
Internet is the average value for one Internet communication and thus always
includes exactly one set of typical customer premises equipment (NCPE = 1)—
what ‘‘typical’’ means in this context will be addressed shortly.
With these observations, and renaming PTU, NTU, and PUENet to PAN, NAN, and
pueAN for more consistency, the intensities of the access network and the CPE, iAN
and iCPE, are:
iAN ¼

PAN
pueAN
NAN

iCPE ¼ PCPE

ð2Þ
ð3Þ

The trivial formula 3, however, ignores one important aspect that was not
considered in [31] either: the energy used by CPE while idle, i.e., while not
providing any service. This energy has to be somehow distributed among the
services provided during a certain period [37]. We choose to distribute the idle
energy consumption among the services provided over a given period of time
proportionally to the time those services are active.
For the entire cycle over which meaningful averages can be built (i.e., a day, a
week, a year), we define
• tOn the total time in which the equipment is on,
• tUse the total time in which the CPE is in use, i.e., in which it is used for data
transmission, and
• tIdle the total idle time, when the CPE is on but not used ðtIdle ¼ tOn  tUse Þ.
The CPE consumes power for the time tOn but only provides services during
tUse. Distributing the entire power on the services provided during tUse needs the
factor tOn/tUse for extrapolation. With this, formula 3 becomes
iCPE ¼

tOn
PCPE ;
tUse

ð4Þ

which, because tOn ¼ tUse þ tIdle , can also be written as
iCPE



tIdle
¼ 1þ
PCPE
tUse

The energy intensity of the access network and CPE taken together is

ð5Þ

152

V.C. Coroama et al.


iCPE&AN ¼


tIdle
PAN
tOn
PAN
1þ
pueAN ¼
PCPE þ
pueAN
PCPE þ
tUse
NAN
tUse
NAN

ð6Þ

While such a generic formula is interesting from a theoretical point of view, for
added practical relevance, the formula should ideally be parameterized with
meaningful average values. These values should be based on the equipment and
usage patterns considered typical and will change over time.
For the access network, the fraction PAN =NAN represents the energy intensity
per subscriber. For ADSL2+, this was assessed as 3.4 W by [14] and 2 W by [31].
As [31] is the more recent analysis, we use its value. We further assume a PUE of
2, following the majority of studies.
For the power of the customer premises equipment ðPCPE Þ, a few older studies
consider only modems [14], while the more recent studies consider both modems
and WiFi routers [24, 31, 37]. We follow [24] who assumes that only a few users
use a modem without a WiFi router and that their number is comparable to those
with multiple WiFi routers or WiFi repeaters. This is equivalent to assuming that
100 % of users use both a modem and a WiFi router, either as two separate devices
or integrated into an Integrated Access Device (IAD). Taking into account the US
distribution of IADs versus modems with WiFi routers, [24] puts forward 7.1 W as
average CPE consumption for DSL and 9.5 W for cable. The November 2013
Energy Star requirements for small network equipment [38] call for a base power
of at most 5.5 W for ADSL and 6.1 W for cable IADs, respectively, allowing
another 0.8 W for fast Ethernet and WiFi, and 0.5 W for the telephony functionality of DSL modems. Considering these numbers as well, both ADSL and
cable IADs are required to be just below 7 W. Allowing for the slightly higher
consumption of two separate devices as well as for legacy equipment, we use
PCPE = 8 W.
Finding data for the idle and usage times of modems is far more challenging
and is by far the greatest source of uncertainty. A 2011 BBC study [39] found that
set-top boxes (the modems which deliver both cable TV and Internet connectivity)
are on for 15.57 h/day, but it did not address their usage time. A 2007 study found
that in Europe, DSL modems are idle for 20 h/day and in use for the remaining
4 h/day [40]. Although this study is older, we use its assumptions. The study
distinguishes between the on and idle state of modems, and we feel that the
on-time of 24 h/day from [40] better reflects reality than the 15.57 h/day from the
2011 study [39]. With these assumptions, tOn =tUse ¼ 6.
With all these specific values, formula 6 leads to a ‘‘currently typical’’ value for
the energy intensity (per time) of the access network and CPE of
iCPE&AN ¼ 6  8W þ 2W  2 ¼ 52W

ð7Þ

The average value from formula 7 already includes the PUE of the access
network and the idle consumption of the CPE, and can thus be used for quick

The Energy Intensity of the Internet …

153

assessments of energy consumptions in access networks and by consumer premises
equipment. As mentioned above, however, the formula has a relatively large
degree of uncertainty, especially due to the uncertainty of the idle time of the CPE.

6 Conclusion
We have shown that the energy intensity of customer premises equipment and
access networks has to be assessed differently from the intensity of metro and core
networks. We proposed a formula for the intensity of the former, both generically
and parameterized with typical data for 2014. The next chapter [13] complements
this work with a formula for metro and core networks. Taken together, the two
chapters provide an assessment method for the Internet energy intensity that
appropriately uses different allocation approaches for different parts of the
network. Parameterized with typical values for 2014, this method can be used by
practitioners for quick assessments of various Internet-based services.

References
1. Laitner, J.A.: Semiconductors and information technologies: the power of productivity.
J. Ind. Ecol. 14(5), 692–695 (2010)
2. Mattern, F., Staake, T., Weiss, M.: ICT for green—how computers can help us to conserve
energy. In: Proceedings of e-Energy 2010, pp. 1–10, Passau, Germany, ACM, April 2010
3. Hilty, L.M., Ruddy, T.: Sustainable development and ICT interpreted in a natural science
context: the resulting research questions for the social sciences. Inf. Commun. Soc. 13(1),
7–22 (2010)
4. GeSI: Smart 2020: Enabling the low carbon economy in the information age. A report by the
climate group on behalf of the global esustainability initiative (gesi) (2008)
5. European Commission: Addressing the challenge of energy efficiency through information
and communication technologies. In: Communication from the Commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee
of the Regions 241 final, Brussels (2008)
6. Pamlin, D., Pahlman, S.: Outline for the First Global It Strategy for co2 Reductions.
Technical Report. World Wildlife Fund, Switzerland (2008)
7. Erdmann, L., Hilty, L.M.: Scenario analysis: exploring the macroeconomic impacts of
information and communication technologies on greenhouse gas emissions. J. Ind. Ecol.
14(5), 826–843 (2010)
8. Hilty, L.M.: Information Technology and Sustainability. Essays on the Relationship between
ICT and Sustainable Development. Books on Demand, Norderstedt (2008)
9. Hilty, L.M., Coroama, V., de Eicker, M.O., Ruddy, T., Mller, E.: The role of ICT in energy
consumption and energy efficiency. In: Technical Report ICT-ENSURE: European ICT
Environmental Sustainability Research; call identifier FP7-ICT-2007-2 (2009)
10. Coroama, V.C., Hilty, L.M.: Energy consumed vs. energy saved by ICT—a closer look. In:
Wohlgemuth, V., Page, B., Voigt, K. (eds.) Environmental Informatics and Industrial
Environmental Protection: Concepts, Methods and Tools, pp. 353–361 (2009)

