Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108433 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Computer Networks journal homepage: www..com/locate/comnet Review article A comprehensive survey on Green ICT with 5G-NB-IoT: Towards sustainable planet Sakshi Popli a, Rakesh Kumar Jha b, *, Sanjeev Jain b a b Research Scholar in School of Computer Science and Engineering, Shri Mata Vaishno Devi University, J&K, India Indian Institute of Information Technology, Design and Manufacturing, Jabalpur, India A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords: Green Information and communication technology (Green ICT) Data center Access network Narrow band internet of things (NB-IoT) Green communication Smart health Rapid advancement in ICT is promoting us into an era of unprecedented prosperity & countless possibilities. However, there is one gloomy side of the ICT technology that contributes toward the inflation of carbon foot print. Research from 2020, estimates the ICT sector, carbon emission, to be 1,100 million tons. The future generation networks and IoT will further escalate this figure, as these would overburden the core ICT pillars i.e. Data Centers (DCs), and Mobile networks (NT). This in turn will inflate the ICT power consumption and leads to more carbon emission. Thus researchers and industries are continuously putting efforts to transform ICT into Green ICT. Apart from this, there is one bright side of ICT i.e. Green BY ICT that helps other industries to abate their carbon emission using smart IoT applications. However, the smart IoT devices/sensors/actuators used for this are mostly battery-operated. To reduce the battery waste, efforts are also being made to either prolong their battery life or to make them self-powered or battery-free. This survey discusses both aspects of ICT i.e. Green of ICT and Green by ICT. Firstly, the recent approaches for the Greening of ICT include techniques for Green-DC, Green-NT are discussed. Post discussing this, the paper also confers the energy harvesting solutions & energyefficient techniques for the greening of user device/senor. In continuation of this, 5G green physical layer so lution, Narrowband Internet of Things (NB-IoT) that prolongs battery life is also discussed, including its enhancement from release 13 to release 16, recent techniques to further optimize the NB-IoT performance, and future research challenges. Apart from this the recent advancement related to renewable energy solutions for Green ICT is also discussed. Overall this survey concludes that ICTs own environmental impact must be evaded, to utilize the ICTs tremendous potential. 1. Introduction Information and communication technology (ICT) has grown pro fusely over a period of time. Its prevalence among different sectors of society has made it an indispensable part of human life. The Internet of Things (IoT) and future generation network will further boost this growth to a great extent. Where future generation network (5G and beyond 5G) will deliver data at more than 1000X faster than existing wireless technology, to millions of connections with low latency time . And IoT will be an essential part of future generation network that a utilizing mammoth number of smart devices will aid new services and competencies across industries. To handle massive traffic explosion, high data rates, and to support new 5G enabled smart services, its conspicuous that new 5G infra structure must be built. Besides this massive number of 5G-enabled smart devices, sensors, network equipment, etc. production will also be done. All this will collectively raise energy consumption and thus CO2 emissions. In parallel to this The Ericson energy & carbon report also forecasted that by 2020 carbon emission will rise to 1,100 Mt . In this, the major contribution will be done by data center, telecommunication network, and terminal devices Hence it is high time that ICT own emissions must be reduced by using energy efficiency techniques that would convert the DC to Green DC, NT to Green NT, and terminal device to Green terminal device. The efforts made in abating GHG (greenhouse gas) emission due to the ICT own sector is termed as Green OF ICT. Recently many concrete solutions have been suggested by re searchers for Green-DC, Green-NT, and Green-terminal devices that can cut down energy consumption and save the environment from harmful brown energy. Authors in proposed an energy-efficient (EE) cell deployment solution that assisted in slashing carbon emissions up to * Corresponding author. E-mail address: jharakesh.45@gmail.com (R.K. Jha). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2021.108433 Received 23 March 2021; Received in revised form 7 August 2021; Accepted 20 August 2021 Available online 25 August 2021 1389-1286/ 2021 B.V. All rights reserved. Sakshi Popli et al. 82% in comparison to the conventional deployment approach. Authors in proposed a green scheme that deploys the data center based on demand and observed a swift reduction in brown energy consumption. Authors in using a cyber-physical system analyzed the traffic trend. Based on the predicted trend, they shrank the macro cell coverage area and offload its traffic onto small cell BS operating with solar energy, thereby reduces brown energy consumption by consuming green energy. Authors in proposed a joint task scheduling and data allocation technique to reduce energy consumption at DC. Authors in proposed an energy-saving technique HERO that switches the DC network ele ments on and off, without compromising with connectivity. Authors in proposed a radio resource management technique that on account ing system load, reduced the supply power intake by 25% to 40%. Au thors in increased smartphone battery life by 4.35% by using a display-server at kernel-level. The detailed and classified view of green ICT techniques is given in section II. Apart from this, to eliminate ICT-self-greenhouse gas emissions (GHG), the additional actions that can be taken care of are recycling obsolete and waste ICT products regulated hazardous material use. Fig. 1 gives an overview of Green of ICT techniques. Now the question arises If the ICT sector contributes to GHG emissions, then why it is being utilized by almost all other business sectors? The answer to this is, one completely different aspect of ICT that suggests, it can play asubstantial role in reducing carbon emissions of other sectors and is referred to as Green By ICT. Green BY ICT will bring social and industrial behavior changes to cut down energy consumption. It will be done by intensively utilizing the smart ICT applications and services in different possible sectors of society including industry, logistics, healthcare, agriculture, cities, water management, and education . According to a recent white paper , the smart use of ICT solutions for different industrial processes can decrease 98 % of carbon emissions. For example, e-learning could reduce classroom requirements by 50%. Thereby energy requirements , smart water metering solutions will improve awareness of consumption and cut electricity usage. Industries and research academia are putting efforts to bring this to reality. Au thors in proposed a priority-based adaptive traffic light scheduling scheme to improve the probability of vehicles getting green signals such that fuel consumption is reduced and thus carbon emission. Authors in developed an energy management system for the home that schedules the flow of electricity. Authors in proposed a smart lightning management system and observed that power consumption reduced up to 33.33%. Commercial building energy consumption is also reduced up to 19.8% by automating Heating-Ventilation and Air-Conditioning the system in . Undoubtedly ICT has the potential of abating carbon emission from other industry sectors. However, most of the wireless embedded systems and IoT devices used for these smart ICT applications require periodic battery replacement. This leads to the creation of more waste and hence gives rise to the risk of the direct rebound effect. Because of this researcher are now finding the green solution to reverse the rebound effect caused by using ICT, such as advanced energy harvesting solutions that make sensors/actuators/devices self-sufficient. In addition to this solution are also being identified to prolong the device battery life. Further, the perspective of Green by ICT is being supported by LTEA currently. However, it can be well supported by 5G-NB-IoT in an energy-efficient way. As NB-IoT is a green licensed technology that has a great credential that makes it an appropriate technology for Massive-IoT applications. The credentials such as the ability to support massive connection, low cost, deep indoor coverage, consumes low power, power-saving modes, makes it the best solution for the IoT era. Over the past two years, many new features added to the NB-IoT profile to make it 5G compatible. Hence enables NB-IoT to rule among other competing technologies such as LoRa and SigFox . Research interest related to the greening of ICT has grown tremen dously in the past few years. Recently, lot of review articles have been published on different aspects of Green ICT such as Green Datacenters Fig. 1. Depicting Greening of ICT and Greening By ICT sector. 2 [2022], Green Communication [2325], Green Networking [26,27], Green IoT [28,29], and Energy harvesting [3032]. Despite the avail ability of literature reviews that precisely focus on some of the above mentioned aspects of Green ICT, none of the reviews have compiled the broad spectrum of Green of ICT and Green by ICT with Green IoT techniques on one platform. The present manuscript is a comprehensive review of the state-of-the-art of Green ICT. It is especially aimed to discuss, compile, and summarize the latest literature on Green ICT. This includes techniques to ensure the green operation of Data Centers, Green Core network techniques, and techniques to reduce the BS energy con sumption. Post discussing the Green of ICT techniques, Green by ICT, potential and unavoidable rebound effects caused by it are also dis cussed. To mitigate the rebound effect owing to smart devices, the En ergy harvesting approach, and energy-efficient solution for the greening of smart devices are presented and deliberated. Finally, the recently launched 5G green protocol NB-IoT is thoroughly reviewed. The pros pect of renewable energy in attaining sustainable green solution is also touched. Thus, this paper is an up-to-date review of Green ICT with an emphasis on the Green of ICT and Green by ICT and beneficial for re searchers who are working in the area of power optimization in different sectors of ICT. 1.1. Motivation The escalated CO2 emissions are posing a great threat to the sus tainability of the planet. Thus to mitigate carbon emissions and to improve environmental sustainability, ICT can play a significant role. However, the key challenge of the ICT sector is, that in enabling the better environmental performance of other sectors, it takes a substantial burden for itself. As millions of devices will connect to a network that will generate an enormous amount of data (~Zeta-Bytes) that will be handled by Data Centers and Access Network. This will increase power consumption, and thus consequently an extreme amount of CO2 will be emitted. Thus for the vision of a Green Sustainable planet, the key requirement is to transform ICT into Green ICT. Green ICT includes two perspectives Green OF ICT & BY ICT. The Green BY ICT, perspec tive symbolizes the usage of smart applications that have the potential to reduce the carbon emission from multiple sectors by monitoring whereas the Green OF ICT, perspective symbolizes the mitigation of the burden created by these applications. Apart from this, for the flourishment of Green BY ICT objective, lots of smart devices/sensors will be used. Most of these devices will be battery operated. Hence battery life will play a significant role. Thus it is required that battery life must be prolonged. To ensure this energy-efficient solution along with energy harvesting solutions have been proposed. Coalescing the above-discussed requirements, this survey discusses the techniques that can contribute towards the Greening OF ICT sector. In addition to this recently launched 3GPP, green technology NBIoT that could provide a battery life of 10 years with deep indoor coverage is also discussed. management, power capping and shaving, virtualization, artificial intelligence-based, efficient cooling, and efficient Datacenter design. In addition to this, the significance of Data Center Energy Efficiency (EE) and carbon emission metrics defined by ITU and other standards are also discussed. Further to reduce the overall mobile network energy consumption, the recent techniques that could reduce the power consumption of BS, and core networks are discussed. Techniques discussed to slash base station energy consumption are antenna muting, resource management techniques, caching policies, efficient deployment, and power optimization of BS power-amplifier. Besides this the metrics that ensure the BS energy efficient operation specified by ITU are also pondered. Furthermore, the techniques that would reduce energy consumption at the Network level are discussed. These include Routing interfer ence cancelation techniques, scheduling techniques, cell breathing and cell switching off and on technique, backhaul power optimiza tion techniques. Besides talking about the greening of the ICT sector this manuscript also discussed the rebound effect originated from green by ICT proliferation. To reduce the rebound effect due to rechargeable batteries, Energy harvesting solutions are also deliberated. QoE depends on device performance Specifically for IoT scenarios, it primarily hinges on the battery life. Hence various techniques that prolong the battery life are deliberated. These include the efficient System on Chip design solution, D2D based techniques, efficient charging techniques power saving modes, and eDRX based tech niques, and low power communication technologies. Continuing with the same, 5G-NB-IoT technology that helps in pro longing battery life is also discussed thoroughly. Including its enhancement over recent years that made it an integral part of 5G are discussed in detail. Besides this, the research challenges related to NB-IoT are identified and discussed. A rich literature review of the recent contribution made to make NB-IoT more efficient is presented. A glimpse of renewable energy based sustainable solution is also given. 1.3. Organization This paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses Green of ICT techniques based on Green Datacenter, Green Network, and Green ter minal/user device in section II.A, II.B, II.C respectively. Section II. B has two sub section B.1 &B.2 describing techniques related to green base station and techniques related to Core green network respectively. Section III discusses the Green by ICT potential and challenge of rebound effect posed by it. It has two sub sections section III.1 presents the techniques for reducing device power consumption & III.2 discusses energy harvesting solutions. Further section IV provides an NB-IoT Introduction, subsection A discusses the enhancement of NB-IoT from release-13 to release-16 is done in Section IV.B discusses. Besides this, how cell selection is done is NB-IoT and the NB-IoT deployment modes flexibility, are given in section IV.C and IV.D respectively. In addition to this, the NB-IoT research challenges are discussed in Section IV.E. After this a rich literature review of recent work done to enhance the NB-IoT performance in term of reducing more energy consumption is given in Section IV.F In section V the role of renewable energy for sustainable ICT solution are presented. Finally, the survey is concluded by discussing the observations in Section VI. List of abbrevations used are given in Table 10. The structure of the paper is depicted in Fig. 2. 1.2. Contribution This review paper contributes toward the environmental sustain ability of the ICT sector. This review paper will be beneficial for re searchers, who want to get a profound view of the global approaches to reduce ICTs brown energy. In this manuscript, a detailed study of techniques related to Green Data Centre, Green Access Network (that include Green Base station solutions and green network-level solutions), and Green Device is presented. Besides this, a detailed view of enhancement in NB-IoT is also discussed. Our main contributions can be outlined as follow: 2. Green of ICT techniques For many years ICT is revolutionizing human life by substantially transforming the way people work and communicate with each other. However, there is one gloomier and more ominous side of the ICT technology that contributes towards inflation of carbon footprint or The recent techniques that could reduce power consumption at Data Centers, hence contributes toward Green Datacenter are deliberated. Techniques discussed are dynamic provisioning, workload 3 Fig. 2. Structure of paper. greenhouse gases. This contribution is primarily due to intensified reli ance on ICT devices and services that turn into escalate the energy re quirements. The ICT industry is running on four pillars viz. data centers, system-level equipment (connecting BS), communication networks, the electronic devices, (such as desktops, laptops, tablets, and IoT sensing devices) . All four are contributing either directly or indirectly to greenhouse gas emissions (GHGE). Over the past two decades, a lot of efforts have been done by researchers globally to reduce this impact. To rectify the environment load in the sub section, the possible potential Green / EE technologies related to all four pillars i.e. Data Centers, Base Station, Network, and device are discussed. Fig. 3. Breakdown of power consumption by different components of Data centers . 2.1. Techniques to turn data centers into green data centers discussed in this subsection. Data centers are prevalent infrastructure that is delivering IT services for the past two decades. DCS has now evolved into high-dense server farms. The era we are currently living in can be termed the Big Data Era. The amount of data currently being handled has already scaled up to Zeta Bytes, and it is expected to rise more in the future. Handling this exaggerated amount of data will indirectly increase the severity of Global warming. As more power will be required for computing, ac quisitions, data transmissions, and cooling the DC. This augmented en ergy consumption will either be done in the form of fuel combustion or by taking excess power from grids . According to one of the reports DC will consume 33% of global electricity production by 2025. On a global scale, this consumption will have increased manifold from 2015 to 2025 (~0.9% to 4.5%). The breakdown of energy consumption by different components of data centers is given in, Fig. 3. To counter these alarming carbon emission figures, many efforts are being made globally by research academia, and industries. The techniques to optimize power performance at data centers or reduce the power requirement at data centers without affecting QoS are 2.1.1. Workload management It is a tool that relentlessly monitors the server performance so that corrective actions can be taken to affirm the least energy consumption and efficient resource allocation. The required properties for efficient workload management are job resource requirement, the time difference between arrivals of jobs, counts of jobs that need to be scheduled, job type whether interactive or batch-type, jobs delay profile, and time these jobs/tasks required for their execution. . The challengesassociated with workload management are i) Over estimation of peak traffic to ensure the quality of service, reduce the effective resource utilization possibilities. ii) Further, the nonlinear relationship between power and cooling requirements complexify the server selection process, ultimately intensifies the time required for workload management. However, lots of research have been made in the recent past to significantly reduce the power consumption of DC with efficient work load management. Authors in proposed a power-aware workload 4 allocation policy to reduce energy consumption at DC. The proposed policy loads the job with analogous power profiles on servers sharing the same In-Row-Cooler. Hence eludes the over and under-cooling, this, in turn, reduces the energy consumption by 5% at data centers. Authors in proposed an SCM (stochastic cost minimization) algorithm to determine the optimal workload routing, scheduling, and thermal stor age management scheme. This algorithm helps in reducing brown en ergy usage and also achieves a trade-off among expenses and workload delay. Authors in proposed an optimized scheduling algorithm for the workload. The proposed algorithm imposes multiple constraints to reduce the power consumption of DC. The authors observed that up to 21% of cooling energy and 4.5 % of the total DC energy consumption can be saved if 60% of the workload is flexible. The authors in designed a heuristics greedy sequence algorithm HGS that allocate the task in an energy-aware way and saved 60% of DC energy required for cooling and computing. The authors observed some interesting facts that as DC utilization increases the ratio of power required for cooling/total power also increases. They also observed that less cooling and more computing power are consumed by balanced workloads. Authors in proposed thermal-aware workload management intending to make use of renewable energy while minimizing operational expenditure. The pro posed approach scheduled the hybrid workload (i.e. interactive & batch-type) based on the availability of green energy/solar energy. Such a delay-tolerant job might not be executed until the desired level of green energy becomes available. Further authors in proposed a workload scheduling algorithm for DC powered by both fuel and stored energy. The basic strategy used here is if the DC energy requirements surge beyond their maximum capacity, then the workload is migrated to DC with minimum load. Besides this authors also proposed an online energy management algorithm. In nutshell, it is evident from the above discussion, that workload management is either done by scheduling the task, or by assigning the load in an energy-aware manner, or by migrating load to other DC, which helps in cutting energy consumption. Hence to further reduce the energy consumption of Datacenters more adaptive and dynamic power-aware workload management strategies must be designed. shaving is an economical solution as it reduces the electricity bill expenditure of DC. Power-Shaving adjusts DCs power demand by energy storage devices. However, the two alternatives i.e. UPS batteries & super capacitors can counter the resultant savings. As UPS batteries are designed for power emergencies only, hence continuous charging and discharging may burn out these batteries or reduce their lifetime. Whereas supercapacitors are expensive and may lose their stored current also. The combination of both is the need of the hour. Currently being designed at Ohio State University . 2.1.3. Virtualization Power usage effectiveness (PUE) is an EE metric that specifies "How energy efficient is DC"? It is significantly impacted by server efficiency. The server efficiency greatly relies on CPU that most of the time underutilized (< ~15%) and refreshing just adds to the wasted power. An idle server consumes about 70% of its peak power . Virtualiza tion is a technique that effectively increases server utilization by running numerous independent virtual OS on one physical computer. DC virtu alization includes virtualization of servers (SV), storage resource (SR), and its network (NV). The challenges associated with virtualization are i) Virtual machine snapshot management. ii) Service placement iii) Resource allocation and run-time decision-making are critical. While assuring scalability and agility, authors in significantly reduced the DC power consumption by optimally placing the virtual machine onto the server. Using the game theory-based model the physical machines with minimum residual ca pacity are selected by virtual machines for task execution and all other physical machines with the least or minimum load are turned off. Another approach for the optimal placement of virtual machines on a physical machine at run time is suggested in . This approach utilizes the ant colony system and observed a 5% improvement in EE of DC. Further, the authors in proposed a DADTA-strategy that performs three processes conjunctively, i.e. it first predicts the workload predic tion and then adaptively determines the threshold value for efficient utilization thereafter, the virtual machine opted for migration. Hence optimized the performance of DC and reduced the power consumption. The virtual DC or NV provides great advantages such as reduce CAPEX, improve resource utilization, and also cut energy consumption. However, the major challenge associated with NV is resource fragmen tation. Authors in proposed a joint virtual DC and virtual machine mapping strategy that energy efficiently improved the resource frag mentation challenge. Authors in proposed an energy-efficient vir tual machine consolidation strategy, to reduce the number of active physical machines. In the proposed approach the maximum choice knapsack problem is used to dynamically migrate the virtual machine onto minimum possible physical machines i.e. knapsacks. Hence reduce energy consumption. In a nutshell from the above discussion, it is clear that data center IT equipment power consumption can be reduced using optimal virtuali zation machine migration and placement decisions. This inevitably re duces the cooling requirements and thus overall energy consumption and CAPEX of DC is also reduced effectively. 2.1.2. Power capping and shaving Power demand and workload are linearly related to each other. If workload increases power consumption increases. The sudden increase in power demand can lead to tripping of the DC circuit breaker. Power capping is a technique that keeps the server power consumption always below a constrained cap value, hence could efficiently avoid circuit breaker tripping. Thereby it could be inferred that it can manage the cooling requirement also. It can be applied to UPS, CPU, etc. at data centers. In addition to power capping power shifting adjust the power allocation to individual server Another technique similar to this is Power Shaving that limits the peak power demands at the data center and limits the CAPEX and OPEX, it requires a sizeable transient current to instantly lower/shave undesired power spikes. Authors in pro posed a power management framework that ensures an uninterruptable power supply at peak demand. To achieve this objective a scheduler optimally places the request. Such that it brings down the number of active servers that host the virtual machines. Besides this dynamically based on server demand, the UPS battery is selected that must be charged for a required period. It was observed that electricity bills reduced by 6%. Another monthly power shaving technique is proposed in , which considers different losses, jobs delay tolerance ability, and leakage losses while taking smart workload shifting decisions. Be sides this DC, UPS battery charging/discharging decisions are also taken accordingly to overcome the DC peak penalty issues. Authors in proposed a power shaving with a hybrid storage solution that integrates the super capacitor with batteries. Authors in identified that DC can save forty thousand dollars a month using batteries or energy storage devices. The conclusion drawn from the above discussion states that Power 2.1.4. Dynamic provisioning It is an effective strategy that turns on the least possible number of servers to meet the current and possible future demand . It dis patches the load to the few running servers while sending the unused serves to sleep mode. Hence this power scaling strategy ultimately re duces the power consumption of data centers. Challenges associated with using this strategy are i) Respond to fluctuating demand while accomplishing a trade-off between latency in ramping up resource availability and energy proportionality. ii) Heavy load on the active server would harm their performance. iii) Enhance the probability of node failure. Significant efforts have been done to eradi cate these challenges. Authors in proposed a dynamic approach that turns off the ports based on traffic arrival rate and then evaluates 5 the shortest routing path from source to destination, hence solves the problem of non-proportionality between network load and energy con sumption. Authors in proposed an offline and online technique to reduce energy and cost incurred in dynamic provisioning techniques. The proposed offline algorithm maintains a stack of server-id and assign them to arrive job in a LIFO manner, hence mitigates the job migration cost. Besides this to address an online ski-rental problem an online technique is also proposed that learns the near-look ahead workload pattern to turns the port on/off online. Authors in proposed two algorithms to deal with dynamic data traffic that shifts the load using ratio-based and threshold-based constraints. A data center will offload its data based on outage probability. And then provisions the server. As a result, 40% of energy was saved using the proposed algorithm. The author suggested that Authors in proposed an energy-aware algo rithm for dynamic provisioning at HDC (Heterogeneous Data-Centres). The proposed algorithm considered different switching time of ma chines that leads to diverse latency range, varying workload tendency. Hence to save energy first predicts the load using multiple look-ahead windows and then accordingly provisions the servers. Fig. 4. Types of data center cooling techniques. is the higher heat transfer rate. The performance of water-cooled su percomputer was studied in and it was found that a total cost of 987968 $ is required to exchange the 32 racks with liquid-cooled racks. Another cooling technique is Building envelope: The integration of phase change materials (PCMs) in the building envelope is one of the promising and efficient solutions to reduce the energy consumed by cooling systems in data centers. The PCMs work on the principle of absorption/rejection of heat during a phase change (solid-liquid/liquid-solid). Since PCMs change their phase at a constant temperature so these materials also help to reduce the fluctuation of temperature in data centers. Authors in reduced the cooling energy of telecommunication stations by integrating PCM with a natural cold source in the building envelope. Another important cooling technique is two phase cooling: The twophase cooling system is a prominent solution to remove the large energy load. These cooling systems without using an external energy source can transfer heat at a small temperature difference. Authors in designed a chilled-cooling tower with a heat pipe based cold storage system for data centers and observed a reduction in energy consumption. Free Cooling Free cooling is a technology that cools the data centers without using the mechanical active component. 2.1.5. Artificial intelligence(AI) /Machine learning (ML) based solution Leveraging the Artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities, DCs are now improving their operations and efficiency. AI is now analysing electrical environmental, and mechanical insights of DCs. Such that the sources that lead to wastage of energy are being identified. Thereby improvising the data center energy costs and consumption. Further, AI has added new feathers to DC such as automated monitoring, scheduling, and allocating resources effectively to the massive data request. Google is already using the ML to reduce energy consumption at its data center and to transform them completely into green data centers. Authors in used ML to predict temperature distribution and based on the prediction trend they proactively control the air conditioner. It was observed that using the proposed approach the power consumption reduced up to 30%. Authors in proposed an AI-based refrigerating engine, and scheduling technique to optimize resource utilization and to cut down energy consumption. Authors in proposed an offline-based Cooling control algorithm that uses deep reinforcement learning to control the data center power. It was observed that the en ergy consumption required for cooling was reduced by 11% using the proposed approach. Recently it was reported by Google Deep Mind that they have successfully shaved the 40 % cooling energy. However, Au thors in , when used the heuristic and ML approach for allocation of virtual machines, identified that it will increase the energy consumption overhead by 6%. Author in proposed a genetic algorithm for green computing. 2.1.7. Energy efficient designing of DC DC network operators are facing the big challenge of cutting the energy requirements while catering to the inflating data service de mands. Hence to cope up with the inflating demand together with environmental considerations industries have started using other sour ces of energy such as gas power, solar power, by using wasted energy as an off-grid solution [65,66]. The waste heat recovery process is one of the most situations propitious solutions to cope up with mounting GHG emissions. In the UK the DC waste heat is recovered and channelized to the district heating system . By 2030 two million houses will be heated by DC-generated heat . This will help in achieving Green sustainability. However, some of the DC utilized this heat using the co-generated plant. Summary: With the digitization of diverse business sectors, data service demands and volume of data increasing exponentially. Con ventional DC, cant map these energy requirements efficiently, thus techniques discussed above can assist in overcoming the existing scal ability, resource utilization, high power demand issues. For example, Virtualization of server, network, and storage device can overcome the DC resource overprovision challenge effectively. Further, AI-powered automation of centers giving insight into facts of energy consumption, which helps in cutting energy consumption. Workload management techniques help in avoiding resource bottlenecks; effective design helps to recover waste heat. Coalescing these techniques can help in the transformation of DC to Green-DC. Further, to keep a check on the performance of DC various metrics are utilized by DC operators. These metrics help to identify the area that requires improvement. 2.1.6. Efficient cooling strategies A data center is a centralized facility that manages the operation of information technology equipment such as processors or servers and the design of support systems to provide a reliable and safe environment for IT equipment. The latest statics indicates that energy usage by the data center industry is 1.3% of the worlds total energy consumption and 2% of USA electricity consumption Further in the data center electricity used by the cooling system, IT equipment, and other equipment (UPS, power distribution, etc.) are generally 38%, 52%, and 10% of the total energy consumption. To maintain an optimum humidity level and air temperature, the cooling system is necessary to provide a safe environment for all equipment placed in the data center. This section provides the different efficient and energy saving cool ing strategies used to reduce the energy consumed for cooling systems in the data center. The most promising efficient cooling strategies are passive cooling technologies. It includes liquid cooling, building enve lope, free cooling, and two-phase technologies. (Fig. 4) Liquid cooling system: When the power density of the data center is high then a liquid cooling system is used. The main benefit of this system 2.1.8. Green data center metrics Data center metrics define the performance level of DC. They can be categorized into multiple classes, such as GHG metrics, performance metrics, humidity metrics, thermal metrics, and EE metrics. To keep the 6 economic benefits high while keeping the carbon footprint minimum multiple parameters defined by ITU are utilized by data center operators. PUE: This metric specifies How efficiently data center utilizes the power? An organization that claims to have Green-DC is determined using PUE. It specifies how much energy is utilized for IT equipment and how much is used for overhead i.e. for cooling the DC . PUE can be determined as follows: Total facility power IT equipment Power PUEDC = ERDC = 1 PUE (1) by the ratio of the amount of energy produced or generated by the renewable energy source to the total energy consumed by DC. Further DC performance per energy unit is indicated by DPPE that suggests making changes to either of the metrics evaluated to save en ergy or reduce energy consumption at DC. (2) TEIT TREIT DPPEDC = ITEUDC ITEEDC (3) Water Economizer (hrs) 24 Days in the year I T Yearly HEC + (FEU + SEU + CWEU ) 293 The telecom sector is witnessing substantial growth in no of sub scribers. TRAI reported that in India alone number of subscribers till November 2016 was 1123.95 Million and subscribers are mounting day by day and among these 1099.51 Million were wireless cellular network subscribers . The unprecedented growth mandates the continuous expansion of wired and wireless cellular networks. This growth un doubtedly adding luxury in terms of smart services to the rural and urban sectors. But on the other side inflating carbon emission. In India over the past four years, telecom carbon emission jumped by 70% . Thus it is evident that telecom Network is one of the eminent contrib utors of GHG. In this section, the techniques that can reduce network energy consumption are coarsely classified into two classes. One is based on the base station (BS) EE techniques and the second based on core network EE techniques. Both these techniques will collectively reduce the total power consumption of the network. (4) (5) Where I T Yearly , denotes the energy consumption over the year by DC-IT equipment, HEC specifies the electric energy utilization for the HVAC process, (FEU +SEU +CWEU ) specifies the fuel energy utilized, steam energy utilized, and energy utilized in chilling water over the year. It conclusively specifies how effective the HVAC system of DC is. Besides energy efficiency, there is another metric that defines the greenness of DC i.e. Carbon usage effectiveness (CUE) [7375] CUEDC = CEFDC PUEDC (6) 2.2.1. Techniques to convert base station to green base station The number of BSs has doubled over the last decade. As per trends, it is estimated that by 2020 the number of the base station will be 11.2 million worldwide. Besides this number of antenna/base stations is also increasing (Fig. 5). Consequently, there will be augmentation in power consumption and therefore a significant carbon emission. Currently, Radio-BS solely account for 51% of total ICT carbon emission . This is due to the fact that for every 1W of IT load required, (2.4 to 4) X power is generated at the power plant. The power consumption at the base station pBTS consists of two parts static and dynamic, where static power is independent of load traffic and dynamic power is traffic dependent. Thus mathematically, it can be expressed as pBTS = pdp + pamp + pru + pcov + pac + pl (10) Where CEFDC defines the CO2 emission-factor, the CUEDC will be zero if a green energy source will be utilized. Another DC Green metric is the energy reusability effectiveness of DC (ERDC) Google evaluated SIPS +ITPS +TRL +HVCL +LVCL +OSF ITPS ACCR UPSL LVCL +NRS (9) 2.2. Techniques to convert network to green network Another influential and crucial metric is the HVAC Effectiveness of the system, HEDC HEDC = PUE 1 GECDC Another energy efficiency metric is LEED i.e. Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design. This metric is given by USGBC that is eval uated based on five criteria: Site Sustainability, Water Usage effective ness, utilization of green power and material used for infrastructure, environmental quality. However, the race is still going among DCs to become LEED certified DC. All these measures can increase the knowledge of DC operators to keep track of DC effectiveness in terms of reducing the corresponding CO2 emission and improve EE. Collectively the IT improvisation and efficient HVAC techniques will bring down the carbon emissions and will transform the DCs into GDCs. Another efficiency metric is Water-Economizer-Utilization (WUE) that specifies how much energy is saved by using water. Hence it helps in reducing PUE values. The temperature of 65 F, attained for water sup ply. Although it is not a very energy efficient way as they require an additional heat exchanger between condenser water and chilled water. However, its advantage is it can be used throughout the year with any climatic conditions. WUEDC = (8) GECDC = GER /ECT In addition to this, certain indicator metrics specify DC per formance efficiency. ITEUDC , the indicator of IT device operational efficiency is evaluated by (3), It can achieve an optimal value of 1. ITEUDC = (7) Where EC , energy consumed in cooling, EP is the energy consumed in powering equipment. EL , is energy consumption due to lighting the DC. EIT , is the energy consumed in feeding IT equipment. EReuse , is the amount of energy generated by DC that is used by another site as a source of energy. Another Green Metric is Green-Energy-Coefficient (GEC) which is PUE value can lie in the range of 13. However, currently due to the Paris resolution, DC is required to have a PUE of ~1. For example, the world biggest Google DC 1, PUE value in 2014 was around 1.7 , for Facebook, it is currently 1.08, 2019 Using the PUE metric, the DC infrastructure efficiency DCiE can also be evaluated as given in Eq. (2). DCiE = EC + EP + EL + EIT EReuse EIT by equation given , PUEGoogle = Where SIPS denotes the energy consumed by Power Substation that feeds the cooling tower, Office area, chillers, pumps, etc. ITPS , denotes the energy consumed in IT equipment such as storage devices, etc. TRL denotes the losses of transformer, HVCL + LVCL , denotes the high and low cable-losses,OSF, denotes the consumption due to fuel combustion, on the site. ACCR , denotes the air-conditioning of computer-room, UPSL denotes the losses due to UPS supply and NRS denotes the Net-work-Room energy consumption Where psp , is the power consumed in processing signal, pamp denotes 7 enhanced layer, with condition that the fraction at the enhanced layer cant be decoded without a base layer. Hence able to achieve uniform distribution of content in a network. From the above discussion, it is clear that the choice of content placement plays a crucial role in caching techniques. In addition to this content distribution also has a great significance that must be considered to ensure reliability while optimizing energy consumption. Besides this, the learning algorithm can also play a significant role in determining the content popularity in a zone of the network. 2.2.1.2. Massive MIMO (multiple-input multiple-output). Massive MIMO is a highly efficient 5G technology that has the potential to increase SE and EE. Massive-MIMO works with the integration of two concepts i.e. Beamforming & massive antenna elements (much greater than the density of users) [86, 87]. Where Beamforming works on controlling energy and MIMO exploits the spatial complexity. Besides this, massive-MIMO reduces the power consumption due to PA, by replacing the conventional PAs with low-cost power amplifiers with an output power in the mill-watt range. It curtails the radiated power using a narrow beam that concentrates the energy only on to target users equipment. The real-time analysis suggested that massive MIMO is suitable for crowded scenarios. Challenge: High signal processing leads to an increase in power consumption at BBU. Other than this massive MIMO, could not handle high mobility. In order to overcome challenges associated with massiveMIMO research academia putting in continuous efforts. The authors in proposed a strategy that assigns the number of antennas incre mentally to each user depending on path loss constraint. Thereby reduced the power consumption of the massive MIMO BS effectively. The author in proposed an algorithm that jointly selects the user and antenna, that iteratively evaluates the EE corresponding to the set of antennas available. During each iteration, the antenna is removed from the list till EE increases. However, if the number of users becomes greater than the number of transmitting antennas then it will select the antenna for users using SUS (semi orthogonal user selection). The author observed a noticeable increase in EE of massive-MIMO-BS, using their proposed approach. Another approach that can reduce the energy con sumption of massive MIMO BS is Antenna muting. Antenna muting: This is another promising technique that surely re duces the power consumption at BS (with multiple antennas) by acti vating antennas based on traffic pattern/load requirements. Author in observed that approximately 50% of energy consumption can be reduced by muting antennas in low traffic scenarios, without affecting desired user throughput. The author in suggested using SON (Self-organizing Network) to automatically mute the antenna based on the traffic load level. In this proposed technique different logical an tennas signals are merged and then a composite signal is transmitted from one physical port. However various challenges exist using this technique that must be identified and removed. Fig. 5. The escalation in carbon emission with 5G . the power consumed by the amplifier, pru denotes the power consumed by the radio unit, pcov power consumed by ADC, pac power of air conditioner and pl denotes the power consumed by the lamp Eq. (10) depicts that power consumption depends on the components of the base station. The power breakdown of different components is shown through the pie chart in Fig. 6 In this section techniques that can help in reducing the energy con sumption of BS are discussed. In addition to this, the metrics that represent the efficiency of base station sites are also deliberated. 2.2.1.1. Cache policies. Presently, it is discerned that a sizeable portion of multimedia traffic is produced due to duplicate downloads of popular content, numerous times. Thus a shift from conventional Tx/Rx communication to content dissemination is required. Although it has been observed in certain studies that caching at BS will reduce the Tx (transmission) energy, but additional energy will be required for caching too. However, if caching is done efficiently, it would decrease the energy requirements at BS. Authors in studied the impact of caching on BS energy efficiency. It was observed that if popular content is exploited and power cache hardware is used at BS, then EE can be improved. Besides this, they also stated that interference must also be reduced or removed for better performance (discussed further in the paper). Au thors in proposed a clustered content sharing technique that significantly reduces the duplicate traffic on the backhaul and as a result reduces the power consumption. In this only the required content is connected to a common edge cloud. Besides this RRH association and resource allocation are also optimized. Authors in proposed an SRC (space reserved cooperative) caching scheme for Industrial-IoT in the 5G Het-Net. In this base station, cache space is distributed into 2 parts. Where one part is used to store the previously fetched data and the other part stores the provisionally buffered data in the transmission queue as the device request. Further, the authors in explored a proactive caching scheme that used SVM and user social ties for the placement of cache data. Simulation results showed that the cache hit ratio improved by 14%-28% and cache operation reduced by 10%-50%. Authors in suggested two algorithms to reduce BS energy consumption while ensuring QoS as per user requirement. Authors suggested that irre spective of video popularity the fraction of content must be placed at the base layer and the fraction of the left content must be placed at the 2.2.1.3. mm-Wave small cell. mm-Wave is a wireless backhaul solution that operates in unlicensed 60 Giga-Hz can significantly improve EE and SE. Simulation results of revealed that mm-Wave radio BS con sumes 50% less power and could offer two times better capacity compared to 4G. But multiple challenges such as susceptibility to obstacle and environment, ability to provide coverage over short dis tance hence require network densification. All this suggests that it is a suitable candidate for indoor niche applications. However, if integrated with current access and network technologies, mmWave could signifi cantly contribute toward EE 5G-network . A hardware-based solu tion i.e. a low power phased array receiver to be used to enable low power consumption at mmWave BS. 2.2.1.4. Power amplifier (PA) optimization. As shown in Fig.6, PA con sumes a sizeable portion of power (i.e. ~64%) consumed by BS. Thus Fig. 6. Percentage of power consumption by different BS components . 8 lots of efforts are being laid out to reduce this portion of power con sumption. One of the reasons behind this is greater amounts of data being channelized over a fixed frequency spectrum which is very sen sitive to distortion at the RBS, PA. To compensate, this distortion wireless providers use larger power amplifiers for the same area, consequently consumes more energy & increase operational costs also. PA must be designed in accordance with system specifications i.e. operational frequency, output power, bandwidth, linearity, gain, effi ciency. PA efficiency is evaluated using PAPR, and it is observed that PAE decreases with each successive mobile technology generation (PAPR was 6.5 dB, UMTS, and 8.5 dB, LTE) . Further, Reference signal reduction using normal unicast, MBSFN (Multicast broadcast single frequency network) & DTX can also help to reduce the operating time of PA, which ultimately reduces power consumption at BS . Adaptive Envelop tracking is another technique that significantly re duces PA power consumption [93,87]. The basic idea here is to keep the input average signal power low and restrict the PA to operate at its lowest efficiency. DPD is another technique that pre-compensates the non-linearity of the power amplifier can significantly reduce the power consumption in the base station . issue of bandwidth scarcity, which is a big challenge for the upcoming 5G scenario. 2.2.1.6. Base station energy efficiency metrics. EE metrics can suggest a lot of parameters be taken care of, to reduce energy consumption Base station Site Energy Efficiency metrics SEEBS = ET IE ETC 100% ET IE = EPGE + EPE (11) (12) Where ETC , denotes the energy consumed by telecommunication equipment at a BS. ET IE , denotes the total input energy either by a brown source of energy i.e. diesel-generated on-site, or by green source i.e. solar, wind Thus ET IE , can be evaluated as the sum of power grid energy EPGE and energy produced at the site EPE . Two important performance indicators specify the operational effi ciency of BS. These are Capacity Energy Efficiency BS CEE and Coverage Energy Efficiency BS CVEE Base station Capacity Energy Efficiency, Total data BS CEE = (Mbits / Wh) (13) EBS 2.2.1.5. Resource management. In 5G, the notion of radio resource has extended to hard resources, which include antenna T-N-C (Type-Num ber-Configuration), relay nodes, and soft resource i.e. software capa bilities of network nodes. Resource management (RM) techniques can be classified (Fig. 7) into Radio resource management (RRM), cloud resource management (CRM), and power resource management (PRM). Radio resource management (RRM) algorithms optimize spectrum uti lization while ensuring QoS. Besides controlling parameters like time slot for transmission, bandwidth, modulation technique. Its objective is to effectively schedule the user according to their needs and anatomize the energy. Authors in proposed a joint RRM technique that reduces the energy consumption with ensured QoS for heterogeneous multi-radio access technology. Basically, in this technique the load on the macro cell is considered to turn on the inner-RAT is turned on for effective balancing and consequent energy saving. Authors in proposed a run-time RM technique defragmentation, to optimally utilize the data center resource. In this, the scattered cores that were frag mented due to multiple applications are collected and reutilized. The authors observed with little overhead the energy consumption was reduced by 42%. An EE, RRM adaptive algorithm is proposed for green radio in that operates based on data rate and takes advantage of link adaptation. Here the physical resource blocks are allocated based on channel condition and consequently, the modulation and coding scheme is lowered which lowers the transmission power requirement. As a result, it was observed by the authors that 76-89% of energy could be saved using this algorithm. Authors in proposed a QoS assured, GR-RAM scheme that manages to reduce the grid energy consumption by using the renewable resource of energy. The proposed scheme minimized grid energy consumption up to 60% and improved network latency by intelligently allocating green energy. In 2013, Kumu-Networks revolutionized the telecommunication industry by propelling a self-interference cancellation technique that allows using the same wireless channel for Tx/Rx at the same time hence immensely reduce undesirable leakage of energy while transmission. Hence overcomes the Base Station Coverage Energy Efficiency BS CVEE = Area covered ESI + (14) These key indicators and parameters suggest identifying the inte grated site power solutions. It verifies the policies implemented relay bring some difference or not. Also, give valuable suggestions for network planning. 2.3. Techniques to convert core network to green-network (Green-NT) As discussed above telecom, Network is one of the eminent con tributors of GHG. This is not only due to inflating subscribers but also due to the design and dimension of Conventional Network systems. As they are opposite to Green-NT requirements, especially due to principles such as over-provisioning and redundancy. Overprovisioning is done to endure the exaggerated traffic hours, but for low traffic hours, it just aids in consuming more power. Furthermore, to assure reliability, fault tolerance, the conventional network is planned redundantly, besides this multiple network equipments are added also increases the energy con sumption. This situation is very critical in INDIA, where 60% of current power requirements are fulfilled by generators. Hence considering the fact of the TRAI, India has decided to give Green Passport to the MNOs . More such efforts are required to be taken to control the GHG emission corresponding to the network. Radically opposite objectives of conventional network needs to be immediately addressed to dwindle the GHG emissions. In this section, the techniques that can reduce the power consumption at the network are discussed. 2.3.1. Efficient routing The astounding growth of Internet data has escalated the number of routers required. This, in turn, has augmented the aggregate energy consumption. The scenario can be imagined with numerology given by the Rocket-fuel project that collected data from forty-five-thousand routers, belongs to ten internet service providers only. The power consumption of a router can be evaluated using (15) RP = CPRP + EVRP + DP BSRP + PPRE r + SFRE br (15) CPRP the control plane power, EVRP the environment power and DP BSRP the data plane baseline power is constant and independent Fig. 7. Possible resource management. 9 of traffic. However, the processing power/packet PPRE and the storeforward energy depends significantly on traffic. Thus to reduce energy consumption few techniques proposed in the literature are discussed here. Authors in proposed a solution that jointly addresses routing and caching to minimize the brown energy consumed by networks. In this, they have exploited the caching capability of the in-between nodes to store the contents such that content is placed according to capacity, distance, and demand. The authors also proposed a distributed algo rithm that effectively deals with varying levels of available renewable/ green energy and traffic that varies with time. The authors observed that 90% of the energy can be saved in comparison to conventional routing approaches. Another factor that severely impacts power, is router advertisement. Authors in suggested network and device side recommendations to minimize the number of advertisements. Authors in proposed routing algorithm Backtrack-XY and Backtrack-random to reduce the number of active routers. In this, they have suggested using the same router, with a bi-directional channel for communication in both forward and backward direction. The authors observed with negligible quality degradation, power can be saved with the proposed algorithm. Authors in proposed a green version of RPL to reduce energy consumption. The proposed approach optimally selects the nodes to act as parent and child nodes by applying con straints. Such that the node with good resource level and having rank less than child node opted as a parent node. Besides this, another important metric link quality is also measured to assure the least transmission required, hence ultimately reduced carbon emission. Au thors in proposed a comprehensive DSDR scheme that intelli gently finds the energy efficient routing paths to forward the data. Using this algorithm, it considers the delay sensitivity of the data, and depending on that it forwards the data directly or lets it wait for a certain time at the relay node to transfer it reliably such that redundancy of data is also reduced. Besides this, it also does data fusion of delay-tolerant data at each relay node within the evaluated waiting time. foliage penetration radar applications. This, IC is done at the system level, such that the voltage samples of interfering signals are identified by a digital signal processor, thereafter a cancelation signal with the same amplitude but the opposite phase is used. Furthermore, authors in proposed a proactive joint approach for 5G UDN to reduce energy consumption, by reducing interference based on the call data record. Resource allocation and sleep pattern are scheduled to achieve the same, based on traffic pattern determined through call data records. Authors in proposed a mutual interference avoidance algorithm, for indutrial IoT sensor network. The proposed scheme utilizes power adaptively, this in turn improves the system throughput also. Further in author proposed an interference aware joint task and message scheduling al gorithm. The proposed algorithm not only minimizes the energy con sumption but also allocates the slacks efficiently. 2.3.2. Green interference cancellation techniques Various types of Interference occur at the cell level and to at the device level, which acts as a crucial factor for performance degradation. (Fig. 8 shows the types of interference). Literature of interference cancellation is quite vast. The authors in raised the question Do all the interference are harmful and cant it be used for performance benefits? and suggested a solution to use constructive interference as a significant source of green power. Authors in proposed a radio frequency self-interference cancelation technique that eliminates the direct path interference signal. The proposed technique used the optical solution for cancelation and this photonic pre-distortion modulator is used, which modifies the signal based on prior interference knowledge. Using this approach author observed a 37 dB across 100-MHz instan taneous bandwidth. An adaptive interference cancelation technique based on SASP is proposed in to reduce the power consumption, especially for 2.3.3. Backhaul network power optimization The dense deployment of low-power and low-cost base stations with traditional macrocells is certainly a solution to cater to the exponential traffic growth. However, the significant amount of energy consumed by backhaul that aggregates the traffic from each base station limits the advantages of heterogeneous network deployments. Authors in studied the impact of backhaul on energy consumption and observed that it accounts for 50% of the power consumed in WAN (Wireless access network). Currently, wired and wireless backhaul solutions are avail able, some of them are listed in Table 1 and some of the techniques related to green backhauling solutions are discussed here. Authors in developed an EE, mmWave backhaul solution for a 5G small cell scenario. The proposed scheme used concurrent trans mission and allocate the time resource in a power-controlled manner while considering the contention possibilities. The authors observed 64% of improvement in EE in comparison to the TDMA approach. Backhaul traffic optimization can also help in reducing energy con sumption. Authors in proposed a green mobile edge computation technique to reduce traffic on backhaul significantly, especially video traffic. Authors in suggested offloading cyber-physical-system traffic onto small cells to reduce the load on the macro cell, powered through green energy i.e. solar energy. As a result, network resource availability will increase. The author in proposed an energy aware traffic offloading framework that uses QC learning. The authors did a comparative study of centralized and decentralized QC algorithms and observed a centralized solution is not feasible for practical imple mentation. As they turn on large no of small cells. Recently authors in proposed a 5G cross-haul solution, to address the augmented bandwidth requirements. 5G cross haul will integrate backhaul and fronthaul. Many other solutions such as energy-aware resource allocation, delay trade-off techniques can further assist in achieving optimization of backhaul power consumption. Most of the smart applications such as elearning, tactile internet application is resource and power-hungry. Hence backhaul power optimization will be an interesting research topic to explore. Fig. 8. Types of interference. 2.3.4. Scheduling techniques Scheduling techniques are used to improve spectral efficiency and reduce power consumption. Scheduling can bring improvement in per formance at different areas viz. data center, WSN, RAN/C-RAN. Lots of work has been done in scheduling in the recent past. The input param eters usually taken by the scheduling mechanism are the number of channels, channel state, interference model, bandwidth requirement, type of radio. The scheduling techniques are significantly applied at the application level, network level, and switch level. For cellular networks, the three scheduling aspects can help in reducing energy consumption. One is rate constraint scheduling, power constraint scheduling, and fairness constraint scheduling. The power constraint solution depends on channel conditions, the fairness constraint solution ensures the fair distribution of resources among users, and rate constraint solutions set 10 Table 1 Backhaul solutions available . S. No Existing Backhaul solution Parameters 1. Fiber/Wired based Microwave Leasing cost is High Medium 3. Millimetre wave (60GHz) 4. Free Space Optics Sub6- GHz Low 2. 5. Cost Challenge in the aspect of 5G and IoT Latency Uplink Throughput Downlink Reachability <1ms per hop 200micro sec 1Gbps 100m -100km 2 to 4 Km 1 Km low 10Gbps 1 to 3 Km <20 msec 450 Mbps 45Mbps ~250m Lack of availability everywhere, Take a lot of time for installation. Significantly impacted by weather conditions The current backbone can support up to 40Gbps data rate (maximum countries). Thus to support the 60Gbps data rate, infrastructure needs to be redeployed/changed. Development of sensitive receiver (required lens) is very tough to receive data rate up to 10 Gbps Aggregation Scheduling (DAS): avoids the superfluous data forwarding and removes the correlated & redundant data thereby shrinks the energy consumed used for communication. The energy consumption of data aggregator EDA , depends on computation energy, EComputation and size of aggregated data D formed of n inputs. If n is 1, the EDA = 0, however, if n>1, it will be equal to EDA = EComputation . D (16) transmission rates based on pre-defined weights . Coarsely the scheduling techniques for both cellular and sensor network can be classified into Bandwidth scheduling, task scheduling, topology trans parent multi-hop scheduling, and link scheduling (Fig. 9). Bandwidth Scheduling (BSH): High-performance networks are overprovisioned in terms of network devices and network resources espe cially bandwidth. Hence to efficiently utilize the network resource i.e. bandwidth while assuring reliable transmission bandwidth scheduling algorithms are required to be designed. BSH can be done in two modes on-demand and in advance. Where the on-demand reservation of bandwidth starts at the desired time and in advance mode, bandwidth is scheduled to be reserved for a future time. Authors in designed two energy-aware bandwidth scheduling al gorithms that operate with two constraints. One data delivery deadline and the second is reliability assurance. The proposed algorithm utilized a power model that maintained the network device boot-up time and shut downtime and maintains an aggregated time-bandwidth table. Whenever a request comes up it updates the available bandwidth for upcoming jobs. Then depending on the time, it would take over a particular link and bandwidth availability over that link jobs are scheduled for transmissions of data. Hence able to save a good amount of energy. Further, Delay in task execution is one of the prime reasons for power consumption at both sides device and network. This can be alleviated by optimal task scheduling of jobs or tasks. Authors in proposed an algorithm namely DEBTS, to reduce the service delay by efficiently scheduling the task. The proposed algorithm takes into account the network channel conditions, service delay sensitivity, and resource availability, based on that dynamically schedule the task among collaborative fog nodes It was observed that DEBTS reduced the energy consumption by 26% in comparison to the traditional scheduling strat egy. Another type of schedule that is applicable for Adhoc networks is Topology transparent scheduling (TTs). TTS is used to remove the re-computation overload from the scheduler. Whenever topology of network changes . Data Aggregator node plays an important role in the wireless network. It has great importance in IoT based network specifically. Indirectly it assists in reducing network power consumption. As Data n DAS techniques can be classified into two categories into slotted and un-slotted that work to improve data accuracy or reduce latency time. Further authors in proposed a self-learning-based DAS policy that used the Q-learning approach to adaptively schedule the slot with high efficiency. Authors in proposed a distributed delay efficient DAS algorithm for duty cycled WSN that restricts the degree of aggregation to reduce the latency in data aggregation and generate a collision-free schedule. The authors observed that the proposed algorithm improves the delay performance by 65.04%. Authors in proposed a scheme to reduce the delay in data aggregation to prolong the lifetime of the sensor node, by constructing a CDS tree with and without considering sleeping delay among duo of the neighbor node. Thereafter, FAS (First-fit aggregation) scheduling is done to schedule a collision free aggregation of data optimally. The pitfall of the proposed approach is high implementation complexity, although network life span has increased. 2.3.5. Cell shaping To curb the energy consumption, based on traffic pattern Cell Shaping technique adapts the cell layout. The mechanism used to ach ieve this objective are Cell Breathing & Cell Switching ON/OFF. Several factors depict the traffic load on a base station like the number of users, the number of occupied sub-band, the bandwidth occupied ratio, etc. based on bandwidth occupancy ratio BS can be classified into no-load, heavy load, moderate load, and less load. Cell Breathing: is a mechanism that harmonizes the common channel pilot power in accordance with traffic load and accordingly reconfigures the cell coverage. This is a load balancing technique, which was first coined with the term cell breathing for WCDMA. Here the heavy load cell breaths into hands over their excess load to neighboring cell and the cell with low traffic load breaths out, thus go in sleep mode, this consequently reduces the energy consumption of network in cost-effective way. Thus also referred to as sometimes cell zooming. The cell zooming techniques/algorithm can be classified into two categories static and dynamic. Physical adjustments, BS cooperation, and relaying are some techniques used for practicing cell zooming. Authors in proposed an intelligent cell breathing (ICE) approach, in this when traffic goes above the threshold level that a low power station can cater to, will switch to excess load to high power base station. Further, to optimally utilize the green energy of low power base stations and to raise the number of users to be served by green power. Fig. 9. Types of scheduling to reduce power consumption at the network. 11 ICE, discover the set of low power BS and restrict them to reduce their beacon power below a threshold value to fast energy depletion of low power BS, hence balance the energy consumption. Cell Switching ON/OFF: This is a case of cell zooming where the cell breathes in to reduce its coverage area to zero and goes to sleep mode. This technique achieves a good trade-off between performance and reducing energy consumption. However, over switching can augment the network energy consumption Authors in proposed an energy efficient switching mechanism that enables BSs to achieve tradeoff between a number of switches and the amount of energy BS can save. Another energy saving approach is proposed in that performs cell switching efficiently using the clustering approach. Authors have applied an inter clustering and Intra clustering aspect to efficiently select the base to switch in ON/OFF mode, where clustering is done on BS load. Besides saving energy Cell switching techniques also solve other important issues such as interference, resource scarcity. However, in the 5G scenario, multiple challenges will bud up especially due to the highly heterogeneous and dense scenario. Thus more efficient cell breathing techniques will then be applied in terms of electronic beamforming switching. Fig. 10. Energy efficient networking solutions for IoV applications. network edge, referred to as Mobile Edge Computing. Adopting the Mobile Edge Computing technologies, a number of lightweight edge computing infrastructures such as Road Side Units are deployed (shown in Fig. 11). ICVs offload a portion of their computational task to the edge servers deployed on RSUs in close proximity. This largely reduces the round-trip delay time and provides the ICVs with high reliability, massive connectivity services, and reduce energy consumption. How ever, edge computing via a lightweight edge server placed on the roadside unit (V2I) is not solely enough to handle the miscellaneous computing task with different granularity and quality of service (QoS) requirements. Along with V2I, Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V), Vehicle-to-Person (V2P) methods of communication are also being used to realize green and sustainable IoV. Based on the latency sensitivity and data to be processed either of these are used, which in turn enhances the device lifetime. Latency and QoS are crucial factors for IoV applications, thus various effective offloading solutions have been proposed for ICV communica tion. Authors in have proposed a time-based optimal task off loading algorithm for energy-efficient V2I communication. The time to i execute ETi the task either locally etlocal or with offloading etOFF is determined for user i as given : { i } (17) ETi = max etlocal , etOFF 2.3.6. Deployment and planning based solutions Cellular networks are being densified to handle the explosive traffic demand seeking effective spectral utilization . However, densifi cation (using smaller cells such as micro, Pico, and femtocells) has put forward a major challenge of augmented energy consumption. Undoubtedly densification or UDN will reduce the BS transmit power but it is achieved at the cost of an increase in Backhauling power . Hence become a major concern for 5G deployment. Intelligent network deployment strategies must be used to reduce the overall energy con sumption. The MOs are facing multiple challenges for efficient deployment such as austere interference, backhauling issues, optimal site location, etc. . Authors in suggested a novel architecture to form on-demand deployment of UDN network with cloud drones, which will be employed on network slice. It was proposed that aerial base stations i.e. Drones will provide coverage in the area where high-density traffic will be observed. The range of Drone will be equivalent to microcell. Another possible challenge is overburdening of Hotspots in 5G. Authors in proposed an interference-aware, two-tier heterogeneous relay network architecture to assure QoS to users. But the challenge here is increased number of relays will further augment the power consumption hence GHG emission. Thus optimal solutions are required to be identified. etlocal = (1 )Wi .Ci Freqi (18) Here Wi denote the total amount of task to be executed, Ci , Freqi depicts the CPU cycles and frequency respectively, Wi denotes the portion of the task executed locally. 2.3.7. New networking paradigm introduced for IOV applications Emerging computation-intensive services including virtual reality, ehealth, in-vehicle-entertainment, advanced-driver-assistance services, on-the-go bank transactions, and road shipment monitoring, etc. will augment the data traffic up to 10 Exabytes per month by 2025. Precisely with the growth of Intelligent Connected Vehicles (ICVs) on the roads and the development of the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) services, the con flict among resource-constrained ICVs and resource-hungry ICV applications are becoming more prominent, . Along with this it is also over burdening the core network, leading to more energy consumption. To address it promising networking solution has been proposed in recent literature (Fig. 10) such as offloading the services onto Road- Side-Unitss (Flying/Fixed) from core BS, Vehicle-2-Vehicle cooperative communication, optimization of beacon transmission. These solutions in turn also improved the network coverage and help in utilizing network resources efficiently. = etUL + etOFF 2.3.7.1. Road side unit enabled mobile-edge-computing. To support resource-constrained end-user devices/ smart vehicles, the substantial resources available in the Clouds can be leveraged . Due to the proliferation of mobile applications, clouds are moving more toward the Wi Ci Svc N Wi ( i Gi Bi log2 1 + TP Bi N0 ) (19) Fig. 11. Insight of 5G RSU [5G; Architecture enhancements for 5G System (5GS) to support Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) services (3GPP TS 23.287 version 16.3.0 Release 16). 12 ProSe will play a significant role in spontaneous communication within a certain proximity. ProSe relies on a side-link air interface, also known as the PC5 interface for direct connectivity between ICVs in proximity (Fig. 12). PC5 interface is 3GPP adopted C-V2X interface that supports communication without an infrastructure, thus can be used as a communication platform in public safety scenarios. Briefly, short-range V2X, allows roadside devices, vehicles, to directly exchange information via the same chipset used in conventional long-range association . Besides this ProSe supported ad hoc discovery and communication among UEs/vehicles/devices, thus offer a means for high data rate transmissions (as it avoids traversing through the core, this consequently reduce the high latency) and high efficiency in resource utilization, this, in turn, reduces congestion in the core network and ultimately results in green IoV communication. To determine the improvement in scalability using ProSe, the author in evaluated the beacon error probability and found that LTE-V2V requires less resource in comparison to IEE-802.11 for the same beaconing-periodicity. Further, the energy efficiency can be evaluated as given in 3GPP-TR 36.746.V1511 / k / i Pi 1000 Ti 1000 (23) EEAvg = i TBi etUL , is the time consumed in the uplink channel, Svc is MEC-server capability, N is the number of CPU cycles, denotes the ratio of output to input workload respectively. Bi denotes, the bandwidth resource allocated to user i for task execution, TPi is the transmission power of user i. Another prediction-based adaptive task offloading scheme is presented in to reduce the time and cost of task off loading. Further, more a novel reinforcement learning-based offloading strategy is proposed in that improved the offloading transmission rate significantly. However, in highly dense and rural areas due to sparse fixed RSU infrastructure, vehicles dont get the required QoS, thus Flying RSu s are used in those places. 2.3.7.2. Flying infrastructure enabled connectivity. In sparse areas, a vehicular network suffers from frequent disconnections, long delays. Air to Ground, i.e. UAV assisted relaying can improve the infrastructure coverage, data delivery reliability, connectivity, reduce power con sumption. Besides this, it will complement the automated vehicular network by acting as a flying accident report agent, flying Police Eye, etc. Authors in suggested a less complex energy-efficient relay selection solution for the UAV-assisted urban VANET system. They suggested selecting a UAV or vehicle for relaying by considering prime factors i.e. transmission power consumption, It has been observed with optimal relay selection that the delivery ratio improved drastically by 96%, hence improved transmission reliability too. Further, as UAVs are energy-constrained, to overcome this authors in have proposed a game theory-based solution that aids in selecting, a vehicle that incurs the least overhead. The energy consumption of UAV i evaluated as Here P denotes the power to transmit the TB, TB denotes the size of the packet, k denotes the number of packets, T denotes the duration of packet transmission. Further Group cast is introduced to support public safety and commercial V2X applications. Authors in used group-based side link communication to overcome the handover issue to ensure QoS V2X services. (20) Et = ET + ER + N here ET energy cost to transmit, ER energy cost to receive, is rotation speed, torque required to drive the UAV propeller, N is the number of UAV propellers. Further, to optimize the VANET performance, UAVs and RSU must be deployed optimally, the metrics that are taken into considerations are accident frequency, vehicle count, and connection time. To evaluate the same author in suggested a framework as given based on above specified metrics NR NSubS (Rj ) max NI subs (i, j)I R (j, k)II U (j, k) + j=1 k=1 WI (i)I R (i)I U (i) 2.3.7.4. Vehicle-to-vehicle cooperative communication. Vehicular edge computing is one of the promising solutions that can assist in mitigating/ offloading the Edge servers burden. It helps in utilizing the network resource efficiently. Besides this, it also helps in improving network coverage . It is usually used for highly critical applications such as an alert for forwarding collision, turning on emergency lights, pre-crash sensing, etc. The author in proposed a relay-based task offloading scheme that uses V2V communication and found that overall network offloading cost is reduced. Further intending to reduce the network load, the author in proposed a routing algorithm for data acquisition in vehicular sensor networks and found that multi-hop is more advantageous over single-hop communication. Besides this, they have also found that V2V and V2R certainly improve the network coverage and reduce the packet (21) i=1 Here Rj , denotes the road I denote the intersection point, NR , NSS specifies the total number of road segments and sub-segments respec tively. Further IRSU , IUAV specifies whether sub-segment has RSU or UAV coverage {0, 1}. Wss , defines the weight as a function of metrics defined above. The weights can be evaluated as , ) ( VT (SS, j) L(SS, j) Wss = . (22) DR + 1 (avgs ) + 1 Here VT (SS, j) represent the total number of vehicles in the road subsegment of road j, L(SS, j) is the length of the road sub-segment, dispersed rate of the vehicles on the road, avgs the average speed of vehicles. Through simulating the deployment scenario, authors found using less UAV degrades the coverage. Hence trade-off needs to be evaluated while keeping the value low. Recently a lot of UAV placement optimization-related research is done using the reinforcement learning algorithm. Apart from relay selection and optimizing the beacon storm routing in UAV-VANET, also plays a critical role. Recently, an adaptive geographic routing based on Q-learning is proposed in for UAV-VANET. Rich information regarding routing protocols for UAV routing protocol is given in , readers interested can refer to this for more information on the same. 2.3.7.3. Beaconing using proximity service (ProSe). In 5G-enabled IoT, Fig. 12. Multiplemultiple-Input 13 error rate . Platooning of multiple vehicles (either cars or trucks) also helps in reducing ITS energy consumption. Authors in found that while platooning a smaller distance between vehicles results in more energy (fuel) saving. Further, a cluster-based scheduling and power control algorithm is proposed in for efficient multi-hop V2V communication. A high computation-based joint V2V and cluster to cluster centralized power allocation algorithm is proposed in . Further to offload the routing burden on traffic light system, an intersection-vehicle-fog model is proposed in , that enables the vehicles to use the fuzzy system to take decision when to stop at an intersection point. using Eq. (28) C E tot = C E agg + C E cn + C E an + C E tn Where C E an denotes the Access NT, which is evaluated as the sum of carbon emission due to landline, mobile network, fiber network, and broadband network., C E cn denotes the core network, C E agg is aggre gator carbon emission, C E tn transmission network carbon emission Coalescing all these metrics, multiple actions can be taken to improve the network energy efficiency. So that it can be converted to a Green network. 2.4. Techniques to turn edge/user device to green edge/user devices 2.3.7.5. Green routing using software-defined network. The phenomenal increase in IoT connecting devices and diverse IoT-related applications poses scalability and interoperability challenges to IoT networks. This exponential increase in internet traffic cant be handled by traditional network technologies in real-time. To overcome such challenges Soft ware-defined Network is proposed, that decouples the control plane from the data plane. This facilitates the implementation of intelligentmanagement-functionalities and delivers agility and elasticity that IoT demands without changing the underlined architecture. The SDN controller using global knowledge can identify the optimal route for data transmission with an energy-aware routing algorithm to ensure green routing . To reduce the energy consumption of the data center due to network flow-scheduling, a routing scheme based on SDN is proposed in . Further to enable the processes of the control plane to manage the energy consumption of host nodes has standardized an interface GAL between data and control plane. Authors in have proposed SDN for RSUs to support IoV onboard unit demands effi ciently. Authors in used SDN for fast-path planning of vehicles, to reduce the driving time. Furthermore, to overcome the challenge of an unreliable link due to the single point failure of a centralized controller, Blockchain technology is being integrated with SDN. The tremendous rise in the volume of user equipment (including smart devices, smart appliances, smart wearables, smartphones, smart cars, smart PCs, and other e devices) undoubtedly making our life more resourceful, but at the stake of augmented carbon emission. The emis sions from these e-devices and their consequent impact on the envi ronment come from energy consumed in manufacturing and running these devices. Besides this metals mining and waste dumping are add-on contributors to the overall ICT industry GHG emission. These emissions will mount aggressively due to the integration of IoT applications in our day-to-day life routine. However, companies are more aware and putt ing in their desired efforts to mitigate the environmental challenges. Dematerializing, developing energy-saving chips, giving Eco-rating on equipment are some of those efforts, etc. In section III techniques that can reduce the device run time, energy consumption, and self-powered energy harvesting techniques are discussed thoroughly. 2.4.1. User device energy efficiency metrics The important metric used for the evaluation of device sustainability is LCA i.e. Life cycle Assessment. LCA is an analytical method environment impacts related to device, network, and service can be evaluated. ISO 14044 given the steps for LCA. It is defined based on four phase study : 2.3.8. Network EE metrics To evaluate the energy efficiency of the network, multiple metrics are evaluated. That is discussed here Network consumed energy metric ECM = ECBSi,k + ECSIi + ECBHj + ECRCl (24) k j Phase 1 Goal and Scope, define hardware, software, consumable, site infrastructure, storage of goods. Phase 2 Life cycle inventory (LCI) Phase 3 Life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) Phase 4 Life cycle interpretation. l The metric denotes the total energy consumed by all equipment including the BS, rectifier, tower-mount-amplifier, climate-equipments, backhaul connections, etc. Where SI, denotes the energy consumed by infrastructure that sup ports feeding power to the network. BH, referrers to backhaul. Two key indicators, data volume transferred by multiple equipments of network and global coverage area are used to evaluate network dataEE and coverage-EE Data volume indicator (DVI) DVN = DVPSN + DVCSN Besides this energy efficiency index (EEI) is also being given to ap pliances since 2010 according to European Union. From the above discussion, it is clear that multiple techniques can assist in reducing the energy consumption of ICT. Giving hope for a sustainable planet as ICT will only be able to reduce the environmental impact only if its own impact will be evaded. The summary of the abovediscussed techniques corresponding to Green-BS, Green-DC, Green-NT, together with energy efficiency metrics given in Table 2. As discussed before ICT own carbon emission, needs to be abated although its usage in other sectors can definitely reduce the environmental burden . Apart from the above discussed, Green of ICT solutions, renewable energy can also play a significant role in reducing carbon emission. In section V the carbon emission reduction using renewable energy source is discussed. (25) This indicator can be evaluated as the sum of DV transferred by packet switching and by circuit switching over a period of time Hence the data-EE of the network is evaluated by (26) EENDV = DVN (Bit / joule) ECM 3. Green BY ICT (26) Green BY ICT will bring widespread use of ICT equipment and technologies in all possible business sectors for energy saving. In a sense Green By ICT will add smartness to our life by digitizing every field. Its maximization will ensure an environmentally sustainable society. It is reported in The ICT can assist in abating 1.5Gt in 2030 in the Eu ropean Union(EU) which is equivalent to 37% of GHG emission in 2012. Smart 2020 concluded that globally 16.5% of GHG emissions can be abated by using ICT. Various smart ICT applications there that can Whereas the coverage-EE is evaluated by (27) EENc = CN (m sq. / joule) (28) (27) Here CN , denotes the area covered by the network that being investigated. TRAI evaluates the total carbon emission from telecom network 14 Table 2 Techniques for Green of ICT. Data Center Technique Advantage and Disadvantage Metrics to evaluate the efficiency of ICT equipment Dynamic provisioning Disadvantage DC Electric Efficiency metrics PUE, indicates to use the device with their maximum efficiency Suggest: to cut the energy consumption of DC by including EE techniques such as dynamic provisioning, efficient HVAC system, using Green Energy. DCiE, illustrate the IT equipment power consumption share against total consumption. For example, If a PUE of DC is 1.5, then the DCiE will be 66%. IT equipment energy efficiency techniques ITUE, gives an indication of energy consumption by IT Suggestion To use Virtualization and omit the excessive number of operating devices. , Workload management ITEE, indicates the efficiency of IT equipment. Suggestion: To use more energy-efficient IT equipment to save energy GEC, suggests substituting the brown energy source with a green energy source such as wind, solar energy. CUE, this metric suggests that how effectively the DC is mitigating the Carbon emission issue, this also depends on GEC Workload management Virtualization and Software Defined Network solution Power capping and shifting a) Temporarily disabling certain nodes might exploit the load capacities of both the network links and servers active at the moment. b) Overburdening the active servers will adversely impact response time c) It Will also impact the reliability Advantage Optimal workload distribution on available servers reduces the heat dissipation and thus cooling requirements. a) Reduces the operational cost b) Power required for operation and cooling reduced. c) The flexibility of movement between physical machines a) Overall server performance can be optimized with a constraint on the power budget. b) Helps in managing peak-power capacity in multiple ways. Optimizing Memory energy by intelligent refreshing techniques and also by using flash memory instead of DRAM Base Station Machine Learning/ Deep Learning / Reinforcement learning Architecture based Solution On-Site Power Production. Caching technique Massive MIMO Antenna Muting Power Amplifier optimization mmWave Core Network Resource management Cell Shaping Cell Breathing/Cell Zooming Cell Switching ON/OFF Architecture-Based Heterogeneous Multi-RAT Relays Densification UDN using small Cell Efficient Routing Interference Cancellation Green Scheduling Backhaul power optimization Terminal Device Device to Device Communication Continue3a) Lacks handling speed and stability. Continue3b) If not done robustly then overburden the circuit breakers. Flash memory consumes less power and can store more data, this in turn will reduce cache servers thus ultimately power consumption will be reduced. Besides this intelligent refreshing of the cell will also impact the power consumption Proactive failure predictions, troubleshooting, and automated fixes Reuse the waste heat, hence reduces GHG emission Will reduce the traffic burden on network components and hence reduce the power consumption. Will increase Spectral efficiency, reduce radiated power, Interference is reduced Might increase baseband energy consumption Highly sensitive to speed Can help in slashing power consumption of BS Could travel over a short distance. Improves capacity, This technique has two view aspect One aspect to reduces the power consumption of a BS, Other is the collective view when multiple BS will be turned off /ON it reduces the Network power consumption. But would increase the response time of the network. Supports cooperative communication Improves reliability Femtocell bring increased interference problems and consequently more collisions and lost packets. Helps in detecting optimal and shortest transmission path, less congestive path, reduce congestion Improves the network performance, reliability It can help in reducing the transmission power by exploiting the channel condition information Reduce load on the network by using energy-aware decision for offloading of data onto small cells, etc. Improves spectral efficiency, enhances link reliability, reduces latency improves battery life, suffers from interference. Base station energy efficiency metrics SEEBS , (Mbits/Wh)(13) Network consumed energy metric. ECBSi,k + ECSIi + ECBHj + ECRCl Data-EE of the network is evaluated by EEDV (bit/joule) N = the coverage-EE is evaluated by EEcN = (m sq./joule) Here CN , denotes the area covered by network that being TRAI evaluates the total carbon emission from telecom network using equation Ecorating: increase the user awareness about the impact of the device on the environment. These GHG emissions corresponding to the device are given diversely based on multiple factors: recyclability rate, Material used, water used in the manufacturing process, transportation, etc. End-of-Life A life cycle assessment of the device is done to evaluate (continued on next page) 15 Table 2 (continued ) device sustainability. In general, it includes four steps. Inventory analysis, impact analysis, improvement analysis, initiation. (ISO 14140:1998) assist in abating GHG emissions are Smart transport, Smart Logistics, Smart manufacturing, Smart building, Smart energy, smart health, smart traffic control, smart education, smart banking, smart agriculture, smart shopping (Fig.13, describes the potential of diverse IoT application to abate overall carbon emission from other sectors). Where Smart build ings or smart homes will manage the energy utilization by properly monitoring the usage of things, reduce the cooling requirements, etc. will reduce carbon emission. Similarly, smart traffic management can increase the green hit ratio, thus less waiting time on traffic lights, reduced carbon emission . Challenge of Rebound effect: - Undoubtedly, these smart IoT appli cations will enable consumers and businesses to enjoy new services. It is considered a promising solution to tackle the environmental changes, as it can help in abating the carbon footprint of other industries. However, the unprecedented rise in demand for smart devices leading to the risk of (Fig.14) Direct rebound effect and Material Rebound effect . Because a substantial amount of embodied energy will be consumed in the manufacturing of devices. In alignment with reports given by Google and Apple, Authors in , have estimated that by 2027, global production of IoT will lead to carbon emission in the range of 22 to 562 MtCo2-eq/year, or in the worst case, it can go up to 1000 MtCo2-eq/year. Besides this metals mining and waste dumping are add-on contributors to the overall ICT industry GHG emission. Thus IoT devices have been predicted to be the leading energy guzzler in Information and Communications Technology by 2020. Thereby, to take advantage of Green by ICT in a sustained manner, device designs must be optimized, deployment must be opti mized, device /battery must have prolonged life, etc. Majority of wireless embedded systems and smart IoT devices used batteries that needs to be replaced periodically. In this section energy efficient solu tions (as shown in Fig.15) to reduce the device power consumption. Besides this Energy Harvesting solutions to make IoT device selfsufficient discussed in section 3.2 number of heterogeneous smart devices connecting to the Internet. These IoT devices are battery powered, with minimal compute and storage resources. Because of their constrained nature a solution that facilitates communication with low power consumption are required. Thereby alternative protocols (at Application, MAC, and Physical layer) have been developed to support the Green IoT communication that are explained in this section. a) Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP): is a web transfer protocol designed to use for constrained IoT device network. Being bound to UDP instead of TCP makes CoAP more suitable for IoT applications. Furthermore, to meet the IoT requirements such as low power con sumption and act in the existence of lossy and noisy links CoAP modifies some HTTP functionalities. The energy-efficient design is implicitly built-in in the CoAP protocol design. Besides this to reduce regular and frequent resource queries it offers an observe mode, wherein a client registers the interest of a certain resource, to which responder will report whenever updated. This in turn reduces the request response round trips while keeping information exchange a ubiquitous service. In addition to this, it lets an energy constrained server stay in sleep mode between observe notification transmissions periods. It also de fines, CoAP proxies that can cache resource representations provided by sleepy CoAP servers and respond to clients requests using the recent resource representation in case of non-availability of the corresponding server. It must also be noticed that as CoAP supports two transmission modes reliable (with Ack) and non-reliable (without Ack), however being UDP supported CoAP default congestion control mechanism is not efficient. Thereby to overcome the issues of CoAP default congestion control mechanism, new schemes have been developed such as CoCoA , CoCoA+, etc based on attributes such as Round Trip Time (RTT) calculations, queueing delay, traffic rate conditions, and bandwidth delay product. Besides this author in proposed a dynamic approach to select the CoAP operation mode, which in turn improves QoS and device battery life. b) Message Queue Telemetry Transport (MQTT): is a lightweight pub lish or subscribe message transport protocol, designed for constrained IoT/M2M environments devices that use unreliable or low bandwidth links. It is primarily suitable for event-oriented interactions and con structed above the TCP protocol. Numerous applications utilize the MQTT such as health care, monitoring, energy meter, and Facebook notification. To ensure reliable delivery of messages, MQTT implements three QoS levels,i.e. at-most-once, at-least-once, and exactly once (2). The author in analyzed the impact of QoS on the battery life of a device and found that energy consumption varies significantly using different QoS levels. It was found that with QoS (1) and QoS(2) con sumes 29% and 87% more power than QoS(0) . Hence, QoS must be opted aptly, based on reliability requirement, consider battery life time and energy required to be spent for communication and latency. Presently, the wide acceptance of MQTT protocol in the diverse application domain, has upsurge critical security problem. one can use the unprotected MQTT servers to enable covert channels for malicious communication. Authors in presented a survey on MQTT based covert channel. The recently launched MQTT v5.0 protocol introduced network covert channels concept that allows users to transmit infor mation very secretly. This newer secure version is anticipated to take over the IoT/M2M market very soon. The improvement in the newer version is (Fig. 16): Session Ending: at the time of disconnection MQTT 5.0v support usage of Clean Start whereas 3.11v make use of clean ses sion, User can also send negative acknowledgment, Improved 3.1. Energy efficient solutions for reducing IoT device power consumption 3.1.1. Energy efficient communication using lightweight IoT protocol As the Internet of Things is growing very rapidly, there are a large Fig. 13. Potential of reducing carbon emission with smart IoT applica tions . 16 Fig. 14. Unavoidable Impact of ICT growth. APP += powertrace % add the statement in Makefile% #include powertrace.h % add these statements in the application code powertrace_start(CLOCK_SECOND * m);% here m specifies after how many seconds Further utilizing this the power consumption is evaluated as given PCProtocols = Energestvalue Ic V RTimerSecond Runtime (29) Here Energest value represents the time spent in either of one of the states as CPU, LPM, TX or RX, which are obtained using Powertrace. Ic , represents the current utilized for the different operations, V denotes the Voltage of the device. The clock frequency is defined in R Timer Second (or 32,768 Hz for XM1000). Runtime, is the time interval during which measurements are performed in Cooja simulator. Comparing, CoAP and MQTT and XMPP protocols power consump tion, It was found in [174,177] CoAP and MQTT result in evident power savings, whereas XMPP protocol doesnt. 3.1.2. Low power communication technologies The low power technologies assist in reducing device power con sumption and thus prolong the device battery lifetime. In this subsec tion, some of the recent standards designed for IoT applications are discussed. Among which some provide the solution for short range application while some provide solution for long distance applications. However, besides considering distance there are multiple significant factors that are required to be considered for the selection of optimal technology for an IoT application. Some of those factors are coverage range, deployment cost, power consumption, latency time, security issues, and capacity . The 802.15.4 protocol is designed to support low power communication among IoT devices that require a long battery life. At max it utilizes only a little transmission power of 1mw, equivalent to one Fig. 15. Techniques to reduce the rebound effect due to IoT powering devices. authentication: MQTT 5.0 allow the user to use password along with username, Shared subscription: this is the main difference between MQTT 5.0 and 3.11vs, it enables broker to send information to alternate members of the group, thus also referred as client-load-sharing, besides this added enhanced error reporting, so that server will get to know why connection get disconnected using reason codes, Topic aliases: instead of names integers are used that helps in shortening packet size Upgraded client and server restriction are also introduced, such that client can specify packet sixe it must receive . c) XMPP: XMPP instant messaging protocol, its features make it a desired protocol for most of instant messaging applications. However, XMPP utilizes XML stanzas, for text communication, which leads to high network overhead. It also requires a constant TCP link; thus it is not considered as a potential candidate for low powered IoT devices. There are many other applica tion layer protocols also like STOMP, AMQP, that ensure reliable communication. 3.1.1.1. Power consumption evaluation. To evaluate the impact of Green IoT application layer protocol on power consumption, Cooja simulator can be used. In Cooja, power consumption can be computed for multiple stages such as: ALL_CPU, ALL_LPM, ALL_TX, and ALL_RX. To do this evaluation, tool called Powertrace (part of Instant Contiki) is used. For this, the commands used are : Fig. 16. Features of MQTT 5.0v . 17 percent of that used in WiFi or cellular networks however, this limits the communication range to 37 m only. In order to achieve low power consumption 802.15.4 MAC layer set two system parameters, BeaconOrder (BO) and SuperFrameOrder (SO), to achieve low duty-cycle operations. As duty cycle in 802.15.4 is defined as the proportion of time during which a system operates and evaluated as the ratio of the length of an active period super-frame duration (ISD ) to the length of a beacon-interval (Ibeacon ) I beacon = 2BO aBase SuperFrameDuration , 0 < BO < 14 (30) I SD = 2SO aBase SuperFrameDuration , 0 < SO < 14 (31) available over long range while maintaining its battery life, LPWAN technology could ascertain to be highly apposite . Further, these technologies can be categorized based on band in which they are operating to licensed and unlicensed. SigFox, Lo-Ra, Ingenu /RPMA , Weightless, are some of the LPWAN technologies that operate in unlicensed band that have an existing market. These technologies have vast literature. There limitation and advantages are discussed in Table 3. However, in the recent past, three new licensed LPWAN technologies are proposed by 3GPP, namely LTE-M, NB-IOT, EC-GSM to cater, the Massive-IoT applications. Although these technologies have recently hit the market yet giving a tough fight to the existing technologies due to eminent goals i) Plummeting UE complexity and thereby its cost, ii) Reduce power consumption iii) Enhance coverage. It is anticipated that LTE-M and NB-IoT will act as significant 5G components to address the LPWA market. Above all LTE-M, NB-IoT can coexist with other 3GPP 5G technologies. Besides this, the significant feature that made NB-IoT the sovereign among other wireless solutions is its ability to contribute to wards Green Communication directly or indirectly. No gateway requirement hence less number of devices, slash the power required to run those devices. Other than this it enables device to go in deep sleep mode thus prolong the battery life. Thereby less carbon emission also. A detailed view of 5G-NB-IoT is given in Section III. Hence when the duty cycle 100%, devices can turn off their transceivers during inactive periods, to reduce power consumption. Authors in presented an analytic model to analyze the perfor mance of 802.15.4. Besides this protocol supports short 16-bit link addresses as well to reduce the header size, communication-overheads, and memory requirements. In the last few years, several new standards have been launched (Table 3) to capture the IoT market. Such as standard Ha-Low or 802.11ah, which provide enhanced features like large coverage range (up to max 1Km), high scalability, with low energy consumption in comparison of other wi-fi standards 802.11 a/b/g/n/ac and thus apposite for LP-IoT-A (Low power IoT applications). To achieve these features various new concepts are introduced at its physical & mac layer. Some of them are RAW (Restricted-Access-Window), H-AID (hierarchical-Association-Identification), TWT (Target-Wake-Time), TIM (Traffic-Indication-Map) . Bluetooth SIG has also designed a new version of Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) 5 with increased function ality in comparison to previous specifications to make it apposite for LP-IoT-A. The improvements offered by BLE 5 are a) require less time for transmission and reception of data, b) ability to transmit 2X the amount of data while consuming half the transmission power utilized in previous versions. c) Reduced power consumption by 50%. d) Improved broadcasting ability. To make BLE 5 ever more competitive, new power classes have also been added such as Class 1, class 1.5, class 2, and class 3. ZigBee 3.0 is another based, leading standard that offers greener, reliable, robust, secure, highly adaptable, and interoperable solutions for LP-IoT-A. It has coalesced the diverse application profiles in one application-layer. To add on Green Power capability, a GPBP (Green_Power_Basic_Proxy) functionality is implemented on the rou ter/coordinator device. Besides this ZigBee 3.0 uses green power to connect devices and avoid meshing, thus this further enhances the battery life. It is fully compatible with Wi-Fi. Hence can become a dominating participant in the coming years. Z-Wave is an existing so lution for short range communication, The Frequently Listening receiver Slave (FLiRs) enables low latency communication by employing unique beaming technology so that device can transit from sleep to fully awake modes in one second. Hence suitable for short range IoT applications. Z-Wave 700 Series, could offer a range of 300 feet, hence can connect gadgets placed outside the home and far off into the yard, too . Despite offering low cost and low power consumption, wireless tech nologies limits in supporting long distance communication. Hence offers restricted mobility and deployment possibilities for the device. More over, to extend the range, repeaters are required to be deployed densely, thus extortionately expensive. However new version launched in the recent past such as ZigBee 3.0 doesnt require repeaters. On other hand LPWAN technologies offer long range (as it operates with a high receiver sensitivity of more than -130dBm), low data rate (using low order modulation schemes), long battery life (by consuming less power), and require low bandwidth, secure connectivity thus makes it sweet spot. Hence gaining a lot of traction from the market as it can fill in the cavity of desired IoT technology. LPWAN technologies are apposite for applications that require do small data transmissions over long distance/range. For example, parking apps require to transmit only information about its occupancy or its availability, hence to make it 3.1.3. Efficient system on chip (SoC) designing To reduce the impact of Trillions of device on the environment, It is required that devices must be designed in such a way that minimizes carbon emission and e-waste. Understanding the need of the hour for the past two decades Companies have thus switched toward designing in tegrated circuits, to mitigate these challenges. However, designing SoCs especially for IoT applications is a challenging task as it is restraint by multiple IoT device objectives such as low power consumption, More computing power, Low Bill-of-material (to keep the device cost low). The author in proposed to design a high computing, battery-less SoC that can do processing of limited internet traffic. Looking at its lucrative advantages SoCs are used at edge, at gateways, at cloud, where ever possible. For example, CoolBio a Multiprocessor SoC is currently playing a significant role in bio-medical field , as it ad heres to the LPWA requirements. 3.1.4. Discontinuous reception to save power consumption at device Once the device establish an RRC connection, it has to keep its radio receptor on to continuously listen to network to decode PDCCH (Phys ical Downlink Control Channel) even when no packet arrives. This leads to wastage of power, thus to taper the power consumption, DRX schedules the wake-up periodicity for a device. Using DRX a device doesnt listen to DL control channel for a time period and switches to low power mode during that period. Once that time period overs the device wakes-up and listen to DL control channel to check for new arrival . For IoT, DRX cycles are kept longer to prolong their battery life. However, it negatively impacts the responsiveness in communication. Authors in analyzed the impact of DRX, microsleep, and wake-up receiver on battery lifetime of 5G device. It was observed that DRX can reduce energy consumption by 80%, and wake-up receiver concept can provide 90 % lower energy consumption while microsleep can save up to 20% of energy, without considerably affecting the latency time. Authors in proposed to energy model that set DRX time based on data traffic for a device in 5G scenario. The suggested selection process will make the selection in two phase first offline and then offline, to keep the latency below threshold value. Besides this authors have observed that compromising latency time helps in prolonging battery lifetime. Authors in proposed deep learning based DRX selection algorithm. This algorithm trains the LSTM (Long-Short-Term-Memory) to determine the arrival of the next packet and observed that 30% of power can be saved. 3.1.5. Device to device communication D2D communication facilitates 18 direct transmission between Table 3 Edge Low power Technology Short range Long Range Transmit Power 19 Battery-lifetime Frequency band Data rate Advantages andLimitation ~1000ms Month -Years 900 MHz 0.15-7.8Mbps Claim 10 year life of a coined size battery 908.42 MHz 40kbs-100kbps 2.4GHz 2Mbps RF 250Kbps Serial up-to 1Mbps 156 kb/s (DL) 624 kb/s (UL) 100bps Advantage: It can penetrate walls Disadvantage: lack of availability of global standard for 900MHz Advantage: Low cost, less vulnerable, signal remain strong up to 100 feet (claimed by Z-Wave) Limitations: Interference, Signal cant propagate over long distance due large wavelength of signals, Four hops are essential for transmission of signal to device Advantage: Require no access point or routers,Consumes low power Limitations: Does not support mesh network Advantage: Greener, reliable, fully internet compatible, ensure high interoperability, offer desired security. Ha-Low 100m-1Km Z-wave 100 meters in open air 13dBm (Z-Wave 700) 1s(wake up) BLE-5 200m 4dBm ~ 3ms ZigBee 3.0 60-1200m +8dBm extended battery life RPMA 5-6 km UL/DL 21dBm EIRP -10s 2.4 GHz Sig-fox ~13km UL 14dBm DL 21dBm High, 130ms 10-20+ years (target to achieve by ingenue) >10years LoRa ~15 km 1-10 ms 0.3 to 27Kbps EC-GSM ~15km 33dBm, 23 dBm 10 seconds 10 years 900 MHz (FCC), 868 MHz (Europe) Narrow Band NB-IoT ~11 km 23 dBm or 20 or 14dBm <10ms at 164dB >10 years MFBI (multi frequency Band) 11,25,31,70,4,14,71 LTE-M ~11km 23dBm/ 20dBm <5ms at 154dB 10 years on a 5WH battery 700-900MHz for LTE 144kbpsUL 300bps to 200KbpsDL (Rel-13) 900Mhz (FCC) 868Mhz ~70kbps (GMSK) Advantage: High Capacity, Good technology stack Limitation: Lots of interference, Underlying technology consumes lot of processing power. Not suitable for battery powered applications Advantage: High Reliability, Device Complexity is Low as, it can opt random frequency to transmit the channel, extreme coverage, transmit power control to extend battery. Limitation: low security, No Forward Error Correction, BS could not support multiple sectors, Suffer from Interference Limited traffic profile Advantage: Highly immune to interference, Adaptive data rate, long battery life. Limitation: Supports limited size data packets, Longer latency time, not acknowledges all packets Advantage: Improved GSM/ EDGE Security, Low complexity device, all the key mobile equipment, chipset supports EC-GSM-IoT Advantage: Use PSM, edrx (almost upto 3 hrs), Obsolete the requirement of Gateway, Better range, and coverage Limitation: a)No Handoff support, b)Interference immunity is low, c)Lacks of acknowledging Advantage: Provide support for multicasting Positioning, Higher data rates, Support VoLTE Limitation: Coupling Losses occur due to indoor environment, Repetitions slowdowns the transmission proximate devices. Improve spectral-efficiency, offers enhanced linkreliability, reduce latency in Networks. Above all due to direct trans mission improves battery life time of the device . It can be classi fied into types out-band and in-band communication. The challenges associated with this technique degradation in performance due to complex interference scenarios. To reduce interference, the transmission power of cellular users and D2D users are tuned based on SINR values. Although D2D enhance the battery life yet advance device discover algorithm doesnt ensure the same. Another crucial challenge is effective channel estimation. Researchers are continuously looking for a solution that can eradicate these prime challenges associated with D2D communication. However, leveraging its ability authors in improved battery life of smartphone using novel Ds2D communication. Authors in proposed a power control scheme for D2D communi cation. During analysis, authors observed that as the number of D2D pairs increases EE deteriorates due to interference. Although, due to frequency reuse the aggregate throughput increased linearly with an increase in D2D pairs. Further, authors in proposed an algorithm to improve the battery lifetime of device. The proposed algorithm en sures the energy efficient spectrum sharing using cooperative trans mission. Here primary transmitter on failing to achieve the desired data rate will make use of game theory to find the secondary transmitter to act as a relay which will only amplify and forward the data. Besides this application priority is also considered to augment the battery lifetime. 3.2. Energy harvesting for end devices Inescapably IoT implementations result in an unparalleled amount of energy consumption for powering IoT devices. Hence it can be stated that multi-functionality of the IoT comes at a cost of high power consumption. Typically, to power IoT remote appli cations battery power is used that get depleted in due course of time, despite of breakthrough developments in communication protocols, power management mechanisms, routing protocols, etc. To confirm the uninterrupted operation of the IoT network, costly repair operations, i.e. battery replacement need to be performed, recurrently. This has a negative impact on the environment. Intuitively, to realize the greening and self-sustainability of IoT devices, it must be facilitated with GreenEnergy-Harvesting capabilities [198,199]. Energy harvesting is a process of converting readily available energy from the environment to usable electrical energy. Diverse energy sour ces exist in environments that can be harnessed to power IoT applica tions (Fig. 17 (a)). The applicability of particular energy harvesting depends on the type and amount of the available ambient energy as well as on the size limitations of IoT devices. Generally, voltage harvested from ambient sources is rectified with a rectifier. Thereafter DC-DC convertor charges the super capacitors or batteries. which is then used to power IoT devices/sensors/actuators. The mechanism is shown in Fig. 17 (b). To power a sensor node through harvested energy, two mechanisms are there. 1) harvest and store (harvested energy is stored in super capacitors or batteries and used later on.) 2) harvest and use (harvested current is sufficient enough to run the device and it is used immediately.) In this section different types of energy harvested are discussed. Along with this, recent work and advancements made corresponding to each harvester and challenges associated with it are also given. 3.1.6. Energy-efficient caching A significant percentage of IoT traffic is repetitive, i.e. many users demand much of the identical content. Thus rather than activating the IoT-sensors for each sensing request sensed data is cached at the network edge/fog layer/gateway/routers. This in turn reduces the network traffic load and increase the IoT device sleep time. Moreover, three questions, i.e. where, how, and what to cache play a crucial role in caching. Author in have classified Caching strategies into three types a) Probabilistic caching: content is replicated by storing several copies of the same contents at many locations. b) Cache-Capacity- aware replicates content along data routing path, hence more overhead c) Most Popular cache: places the content on all neighborhood routers (Table 4). Author in proposed the Most-Interested-Content-Caching strat egy. Various parameters/ merits that specify the efficiency of caching decision are Latency (LT), link load, hit ratio (HT), path length. Recently a lot of research work has been done to optimize caching. Authors in proposed a greedy approach for content placement, that improved the HT up to 50% and LT up to 28%. The author in proposed a green cooperative content sharing strategy and used renewable harvested energy for data storage-units. The proposed approach reduced the energy consumption by 23 %. The author in proposed an energy aware caching and routing algorithm for green communication. The proposed approach results in saving 90%of energy. Further, the author in proposed an SDN enabled caching tech nique, that reduced the hop count by 42% and improved hit ratio by 72%. Authors in presented a cache localization approach, for device to device energy efficient communication. They have found that energy consumption gets reduced significantly with D2D communica tion and mount in case of device to gateway communication. All the above specified solutions one way or other help in reducing power consumption of resource-constrained IoT devices, this, in turn, prolongs/extends the device power source life. Still not in years or de cades these batteries will be dumped which will ultimately hamper the climate. Thus researchers and industries are identifying green energy solutions that have the least impact on the environment. In the next section, green energy harvesting solutions for IoT are reviewed. In continuation of this discussion another potential 5G green phys ical layer solution, NB-IoT is discussed thoroughly in the next section. Table 4 Caching strategies with merits evaluation and impact. Strategy Probabilistic caching Merits Time for which transmitted content needs to be cached, Tin Path length for consumers Interest and the corresponding content, PL CacheCapacityaware Most interesting content 20 For placement of content in vicinity of end device, Pbcc Equations Tin = Impact k m+1 CCr r=1 TTW Avgstrg (CCr cache capacity, TTW, target time window) PL = TSinceInception TSinceBirth More overhead Reduce the new content Leads to bandwidth wastage Pbcc = Tin + PL Cache-CapacityValue,CCV Csize (i) l(i) compensation during the heavy load at routers cache, L is total load Content weight, WPC WPC = logcontotal PCranking Threshold value, THccv THccv = CCV(highest) WPC Most interesting MPC = LN I MNI PCI XN 2MNI PCI NSC MNI is maximum number of intrest for a content, PCI , is preceding content interest, NSC successive content interest, LNI least interest for content l CCV(i) = Cache hit ratio cant be met, large eviction ratio in comparison to above two 3.2.1. Light energy harvester Photovoltaic (PV) /Light energy harvesters can enable IoT devices to operate for years, without regular battery replacement. To accomplish this conversion, devices called PV cells are used, made of semiconductor materials in which a constant electric field is created using a PN junc tion. The amount of current generated can be evaluated as V + R s I V + rs I Iout = IShCt Is (32) exp Ns KT 1 rsh q intelligent power track switching method to enhance the energy effi ciency of the LEH system. The light energy harvester is currently being used for the greening of numerous intermittent IoT applications [211213], however certain challenges such as considerable fluctua tions of output power, inoperability at night, and maintenance costs, limits their usage for critical, i.e. Latency sensitive applications. 3.2.2. Thermal energy harvesters (TEH) Thermal energy harvester captures the heat, present in the ambient environment and transformed into electric potential to provide a long lasting supply to IoT devices . For instance, effective thermal en ergy up to 20 mW/cm2 is continually offered by the human body. Two techniques used to harvest thermal energy are thermoelectricity and pyroelectricity. The output power generated using Thermal energy generators (TEH) scales with its conversion efficiency and heat-flux. The output power generated using TEG is evaluated with internal resistance irTEH and load resistance lrTEH , thermocouple seeback-coefficient N.pn. T TEH PlTEH = (33) lrTEH irTEH + lrTEH Here IShCt denotes the short-circuit-current, Is depicts the saturationcurrent, K is the Boltzmann-constant, Ns denotes the series-connected cells, PN junction temperature is denoted by T, q is the electric charge on the electron, series resistance indicated by rs , and rsh refers to solar cell shunt resistance. The amount of energy PV cell generate depends on multiple factors such as light intensity, its size, and efficiency. Thereby their power density varies from 10 to 100 mW / cm2. The low illumi nation indoor conditions, restrict the amount of energy PV cells could harvest, this makes powering of indoor-IoT-sensor more difficult. Because of this low start voltage solar systems are designed. Such a system will not only help in harvesting indoor light but also create the possibility for LED street lamps to charge Solar power automobiles . In Author in proposed an indoor PV EH module, that im proves the storage capability up to 88.7%. Further, the size of PV cells used for IoT sensor cant be too large, thereby the voltage and energy, it can give is low and restricted. Authors in have proposed a frac tional open-circuit voltage based MPPT circuit for PV harvester to in crease its efficiency and found that energy efficiency reached up to 93 %. Further thin-film PV cell used for harvesting solar power for IoT devices, degrades quickly, thus researchers are now working on third-generation PV panels . Recently, perovskite-based PV has evolved due to its low-cost, high performance. The author in used perovskite-based PV to power RFID and found good improvement in comparison to RF power harvesting. Further, to improve the efficiency of PV harvester. A piezo electric and photovoltaic hybrid energy harvesting module that smartly controls the adding and removing of IoT sensors, is proposed in . Another hybrid wind and solar cell-based design is proposed for smart irrigation systems in . Further author in has proposed an here TTEH , depends on ceramic plates thermal conductivity TC, internal outer thermocouple conductivity TCi and TTEH outer ceramic plate temper ature difference T TEH = TC TTEH TC + 2TCi (34) To make TEH more suitable for IoT applications, authors in proposed a periodic discontinuity approach that enhances the effective temperature difference across TEH itself, which in turn improves the output power. Authors in proposed a three-way catalytic con verter assimilated TEH, to reduce its power drop and enhance its per formance. It was observed by authors net output power generated augmented by 37%. The author in proposed a PCM integrated TEH and observed its performance improved significantly. Further au thors in developed a CMOS-MEMS -TEG chip to enhance the performance of IoT devices that use TE for power supply. Utilizing this proposed TEH to power the wristband, it was found that output power generated increased by three times. The author in presented ad vancements in nano TEH and material that consumes low power. Fig. 17. Energy harvesting (a) Block Diagram (b) General system architecture to power IoT sensor nodes . 21 the vibrational sources have an amplitude of 0.510 m/s2 and frequency ranges from 60 to 200 Hz . Apart from this vibrating mass and EH mass also impacts the harvested energy. Four main harvesting systems are usually employed to scavenge diverse vibrational sources that are electrostatic, piezoelectric, turbine, and electromagnetic harvesting systems. Electrostatic EH: In this, the capacitor-charged electrode is vibrated to alter the electrostatic capacitance and create power. To oppositely charge the capacitor-plates to a certain level, Electrostatic EH requires an additional DC voltage supply. The FEle EH , the force between two charged plates is evaluated as Thermal systems are currently being employed in an extensive range of IoT applications. TEH, is being used as a key technology especially for wearable devices. The author in proposed a booster circuit, to boost the weak voltage generated through the heat of body parts. Through this booster circuit, the voltage output is increased from 0.1v to 2.9v Authors in have proposed a novel design for wearable TEG with two carbon head spreaders to improve the voltage output. Besides this, they have also found that the chest and upper arm are the optimal placing positions for more power generations from the Body heat-based TEH. Apart from e-health applications, TEG is also used for monitoring water flow , the temperature of automobile engines, smart road-related services, and other IIoT application 3.2.3. RF energy harvesters In comparison to other ambient energy resources, RF energy is most effortlessly procurable. This is due to constantly expanding wireless broadcasting and communication infrastructure, such as analog/digital TV, WiFi networks, cellular networks. Thereby it enables low powered IoT devices deployed even indoors, basements, under bridges where other ambient sources are not available or battery replacement is a critical task, to operate with green energy throughout the day by scav enging energy reliably from available ambient RF sources. The power generated depends on RF signal transmission power TP , D distance from the RF source. TP Pr = 4D2 FEle 4freq2 Pr c2 .gr 1 Q2EH (t) 2 0 A (37) QEH denotes the quality factor. Further the current generated by the capacitive generator is evaluated as dQEH (t) = belec /R QEH (t)/C(t) X R dt (38) Here R is load resistance, belec the voltage source in series, CEH capacitance. Thereafter the change in capacitance is evaluated as CEH (t) = (35) 0 A d + d X x(t) (39) d is the distance among two plates, x(t) is relative motion around plates, A area of overlap. The power harvested using electrostatic EH depends on surface voltage and fluctuation in capacitance due to vibration To evaluate the channel power density PD eq is used. Where gr is receiver gain, c speed of light PD = EH (36) PElect One of the major constraints of RF energy harvesting is it is highly distance dependent . Thereby as the device spreads away from the RF source, RF radiation strength swiftly attenuates, this, in turn, cuts the power levels available for scavenging . It has been found that 490 W of power can be scavenged from 1W, RF source from an effective distance of 7 m. To overcome this multiband and broadband, rectennas and micro patch antennas are being designed and investi gated. To ensure battery free communication. Authors in. simu lated a rectenna design, which yields an efficiency of 78% at more than 10 dBm by using a dedicated RF source. Recently, a battery less, with the astonishing power conversion efficiency of ~ 45%, RF-EH is proposed in to continuously power T1ez430-RF2500 sensor. Authors in proposed multiband rectenna for WSN application along with this power management circuit for its smooth operation. Further, the overall performance of RF-EH highly depends on the matching circuit. Considering the same authors in proposed 2-state matching network, RF EH for GSM-900, which can be tuned and result in early charging with 20% less time with -10dBm power. Furthermore, two-step dual-tunnel energy-requesting (DTER) strategy have been proposed in to curtail the energy consumption on en ergy scavenging device and the dedicated energy source The foremost schemes of RF-EH are wireless-power-transfer, simul taneous wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT), and wireless power communication network. However, this increases the circuit cost and besides this, it takes a long time to harvest the energy hence not suitable for critical applications, hence ambient backscatter communi cation is being preferred, which completely turns the IoT into battery less devices . EH belec dCEH (40) The performance of the EH also depends on the materials nature. The authors in have suggested the use of Dielectric Elastomers, to function on the electrostatic-EH principle and employed it to produce energy from foot-falls. It was observed that 120 mW power can be scavenged by walking. In proposed electrostatic EH generated 60 W output when placed inside vehicle tire, tread, traveling at 60 km/h speed. Authors in presented a micro electrostatic vibration EH designed with silicon wafer and cytop-polymer, that works on, out of the plane gap closing strategy for harvesting energy. Along with this to avoid collapse, a bump stopper was also designed. It was found that output power of 4.95W can be harvested with a low pressure of 3Pa. Authors in proposed autonomous electrostatic EH, that manages the charge passively. It is based on self-priming instead of MOSFET, diodes. Through practical implementation, the authors found that after 40 capacitance charge cycles, the proposed electrostatic EH could reach 2600v from 5V. Further, an angular base electrostatic EH is proposed in , to power biomedical implant devices. The authors observed that angular EH is more beneficial in comparison to traditional area overlap topology. 3.2.5. Electromagnetic vibrational EH (EEH) According to Faradays law, electromotive-force is induced due to relative motion between coil and magnet. However, it has been observed that when the coil is kept fixed and magnetic structure is moved, output power gets increased . EEH, using this law generates output power. To evaluate the power generated from the EEH. The voltage induced is computed with , magnetic-flux and A is the area of individual turn area d (t) Vinduced dA (41) = N 3.2.4. Mechanical energy harvester Another ambient source that can be scavenged to power IoT devices are vibrations, which are generated due to bio-motion, rotation, vibra tion from appliances, pressure, mechanical resources. The energy scav enged is subjective to the amplitude and frequency of vibration. Most of The rate of change of magnetic flux is computed by multiplying it with velocity ve of magnet 22 d d dve dve dt using a genetic algorithm, such that prototype harvester physical aspects like beam-length, proof-mass-length, etc. can be optimized. A summary of above discussed potential energy harvesters is given in Table 5 3.2.7 Challenges of energy harvester: (42) Maximum power generated can be computed as given Pmax = Vinduced,max 2 R (43) 1) Power supply from EH is unassured and often unpredictable, which poses challenges for EH in IoT, primarily leads to the loss of data of tasks performed. To overcome this check pointing is done but this also leads to challenges like . a Frequent check pointing due to power-draining results in signifi cant energy overhead. b Limited power often results in restarting of programs and small power left is utilized to ensure rollbacks, rather than completing the task. This problem is also known as the Sysiphean issue. c Data inconsistency, as two states of data will be maintained, one in volatile and the other in non-volatile memory of IoT device. EEH is used in numerous applications, authors in used EEH to harvest energy from human respiration. It was found that with an ex ercise of 5 min, and EEH could generate 6.44 mW and 30.4 mJ of energy. Using the cardiovascular system as power source authors in used EEH to power medical implants. By appropriately opting the magnet bars material, the thickness of the coil, and the number of coil winds, the EEH efficiency of can be controlled. Authors in designed a novel 3D hybrid solar and EEH to power IoT sensor nodes that aids in decreasing capacitors charging time up to 40%. Another novel 2DOF design that helped in increasing the output power is proposed in . It is based on the uplifting of magnetic structure and velocity acceleration. Through simulation, the authors observed that optimal output power of 10.18 mW can be generated at 8hz with 250-ohm load resistance. To overcome this, solutions like time interval between power fail ures need to consider for starting a new task, energy levels must be also checked before performing the task, Device must be sent to sleep instead of executing the task if the power failure is about to happen. 3.2.6. Piezoelectric EH Piezoelectric-energy-harvesting (PEH) is a suitable mechanism that accredits the ambient mechanical/vibrational energy and converts it into electric power. Since this harvesting is solely based on material polarization, it does not need a dedicated voltage supply, as required by predefined mechanical harvesting techniques. Apart from this piezo electric EH can be designed in miniature compact structures, and scav enge three to four times more power in comparison to other EHs. Thereby it has great potential to be used in diverse application domains such as smart infrastructures, smart vehicles, wireless electronics, wearable, and implantable biomedical IoT devices, etc. Piezoelectric generators can play a significant role in smart health applications, as healthcare is a critical application, and for this continuous power supply is required. To achieve this PEH scavenges energy from heartbeat, Breathing and exhalation, muscle stretching, and blood flow. Besides this PEH also harvest energy from bodily activities such as footfalls, hand swings, and finger tapping, etc. This is done by deploying PEH on, knees, shoes, fingers, wrists, elbows. Not only animals, but biome chanical energy can also be generated using PEH with the motion of animals in the farm, or stray animals to power sensors for their monitoring. The power generated from PEH varies with the PE transducer shape (Cymbal type, Circular diaphragm, Cantilever beam, and stack type). However, most commonly used are unimorph cantilever beam type output power can be determined as Pout PEH = Mvol Zp s.fex ddir (Estored ) 1) High self-discharging of supercapacitors used for IoT device, is another big challenge that hinders the performance of EH, thus re searchers are looking for elongated, miniature economic storage solutions . 2) Lack of environmental model for pre-deployment calculations: As ambient energy availability is unpredictable, thus its better to pre plan the deployment based on environmental conditions, for better performance . 4. 5G-NB-IoT NB-IoT is the low bandwidth and low energy physical layer solution which is designed for the M-IoT communications. NB-IoT was launched by 3GPP as a part of LTE standard in 2016 in release -13. It leverages the benefits of LTE vast ecosystem. For various operations/processes, it re quires low bandwidth of 180 kHz to 200 kHz. . Its an economical solution for Low-power application, especially that require dense deployment. Its numerous characteristics such as simplified design, ability to deploy in different modes, rate controlling ability, ability to switch in a deep sleep state (which reduce the power consumption), sim based authentication, deep indoor coverage, etc. prove that it is leaner, thinner and greener IoT solution than most of the other proprietary solution,. [251,252]. Fig. 18, depicts the NB-IoT features NB-IoT abstain the need for new infrastructure thus can easily and quickly roll out in the market With-in short period of two to three years many new features have been added to NB-IoT profile thats empow ering it to solve various existing challenges of M-IoT viz. i) Cost-efficient, robust and flexible connectivity ii) Long battery life iii) Ubiquitous coverage d) Massive Scale connectivity. The continuous evolution since 2016 has made it an important part of 5G. It is expected that 5G-NB-IoT will create an extremely connected world, by connecting millions of low throughput devices. (Where one cell site could connect up to 50K de vices.). For a wide range of applications including Highway& street light Monitoring, Utility meters (to monitor gas, water) smart appliances, smoke alarm systems, kids and pets monitoring devices, waste man agement, agriculture monitoring that requires to do sporadic data transmission., NB-IoT is most apposite technology. To further extend the range of massive-IoT applications that 5G-NB-IoT could serve, Specif ically those applications, that require grant-less access, 5G new radio for NB-IoT introduced a radical features RSMA (Resource-Spread-MultipleAccess) [253,254]. (44) Here, Mvol is piezo-material volume, , is dielectric permittivity, Zp , denotes Youngs modulus, Estored , is energy stored, dir specifies the di rection of applied stress, s.fex are strain and excitation frequency respectively. To improve the performance of different PEH, many pioneer solu tions have been proposed in the literature. Authors in proposed to use magnetic actuation to increase the output power generated by PE-based rotational energy harvester. Through simulation, the authors observed that as the number of plucking magnets and speed is amplified, the output power increases significantly. Authors in presented a T-shaped PEH that enhanced the energy transformation efficacy by 4.8 times, by obtaining stress/strain from both anchors as well as its tip. The author in proposed a hybrid piezo and photosensitive EH, to provide more promising energy harvesting results. The power density of the proposed harvester varies from 11W/cm2 to 58W/cm2. To over come the cumbersome task of designing PEH, authors in suggested 23 Energy harvester Harvesting system Harvesting Metric LIGHTType Organic Amorphous Polycrystalline Monocrystalline Perovskite AdvantageProvide high output voltage THERMAL Techniques used Thermoelectricity Pyroelectricity Assures durability, require low maintenance 24 RF Continuous and wide availability in urban areas Less complex circuit MECHANICAL Electrostatic Applications Challenges Improvements 10-100 mW/cm2 Biometric monitoring wearable, Monitoring aquatic condition and ecosystem, Smart irrigation system [ Smart stud on roads, Smart honk roads Great dependence on weather, Deployment constraint Sensitive structures for both indoor/Outdoor applications, Maintenance cost is high. MPPT based solutions , Intelligent power track switching technique IoT based PV monitoring is done now to reduce the maintenance cost 40 to 60 W/cm2 Health monitoring based on wearable devices, Automobile engines, The central heating system of Buildings. Mobile phones, Temperature monitoring in industrial low efficiency of energy conversion Booster circuit to augment the power generated through TEG. PCM based TEG to improve the storage capability Nano THE material 1W/cm2 Touch Hand gesture detection, monitoring Museum Ambience, Control Nuclear reactor, Satellite monitoring Battery Less IoT devices Smart Distance dependent Few in sub urban areas Multiband Antennas Patched antennas Ambient Backscatter DTER strategy Two state matching circuit 200 W/ cm2 Body motion Kinetic energy, Blood Flow Periodic Kinetic energy, Smart road with speed breakers, Acoustic energy harvesting Brittle Material Magnetic actuation to increase the harvested power T shaped design to harvest more power Genetic algorithm for optimal designing Footfalls in buildings/ homes V + Rs I Io exp Ns KT 1 V + Rs I Rsh N.pn. TTEH Pload E% = 100 Pinc PEH = Mvol Zp s. fex d2dir (Estored ) FEleEH = Angular based EEH for biomedical devices Piezoelectric Easy fabrication High power density Do not require an external voltage source Iout = ISC density Comprehensive information on potential energy harvesters. 2DOF design NB-IoT journey is remarkable in the telecom industry. As it was introduced in 2016 in release-13 and still it is continuously being opti mized to make fully apposite for future generation network 5G. Ericsson, Intel, Huawei, HI Silicon, Qualcomm, Nokia, Vodaphone are some aggressive participant in this evolution. In this section, the evolution of NB-IoT from release-13 to release 16 is discussed (Table 6) 4.1.1. Low power class NB-IoT is a synonym for low power technology, hence to further enhance its performance, 3GPP in rel-14 introduced another power class for NB-IoT with the maximum output power up to 14dBm . The significance of reducing power consumption is to attain a smaller form factor, cut the extravagant voltage drop and reduce the device cost in comparison to device with 20/23 dBm power class (release-13). Besides this, it also expands the range of NB-IoT applications, primarily due to the flexibility of battery choice. However, to maintain the coverage with reduced UL power, the UL-Tx (transmission) time is required to be increased. As it was observed in [256,257] that as the UE power level reduced from 18dBm and to 14dBm, packet delay will increase by approximately 30% and 40% respectively. Other than this it was also observed that going with the same maximum coupling loss (MCL) of 164dBm number of repetitions will also get doubled. Thereafter, it was suggested for low power device MCL must be relaxed (MCL=164-(23-P) dB). Hence to overcome the wastage of DL/UL and to eradicate the possible adverse impact on battery power. Resource connection setup process must be embedded such that eNB can effectively determine device power level and overcomes the unneedful repetitions . Efficiency is low Dielectric elastomer-based EEH for better performance, Self-priming based EEH Direct electric conversion is not possible Has low capacitance 4.1. Enhancement of NB-IoT since release 13 to release 16 4.1.2. Small data transmission In NB-IoT for small data transmissions, 3GPP introduced optimized Evolved packet system (EPS) procedure these include control plane (CP) & user plane (UP) CIoT EPS optimization, Attachment without PDN, non-IP data transmission support, SMS transfer without combine attach, S1-U data transfer. All together these procedures work toward decreasing the signaling overhead and thereby power consumption. The CP-CIoT-EPS optimization implies the inclusion of UP func tionalities at mobility management entity (MME) (Fig. 19). Using this optimization, UE sends the data packets (IP/Non-IP/SMS) capsulized in NAS messages via the CP to the MME. Hereafter using S-11-U the data is tunneled to the SGW (Serving Gateway) then to (PGW) if the packet is of IP type. However, if non-IP data packets are there then MME forwards it to SCEF (Service Capability Exposure Function). The similar path is Linear Non-Linear Mono-stable Bi-stable Multi-stable AdvantageRobustLow cost ElectromagneticTypes Generates high-output voltages Low cost Capacitances increases with size reduction. Table 5 (continued ) Vinduced = N d dve 10m/s2 at 1kHz Biomedical Smart Vehicles. Medical implants, Structural monitoring like bridges Breathing and Exhalation, Industrial IoT and vehicular networks Fig. 18. NB-IoT features. 25 Table 6 Evolution of NBIoT from release 13 to release 15. Release 13 Release 14 Release 15 Release 16 and 17 Status Device Categories Signal Bandwidth Anchor/Non Anchor Carrier Frozen Cat-NB1 180kHz Only Anchor Cat-NB2 90kHz Both Anchor & Non-Anchor Open Improved <10s for 164 dB coupling Loss CID based Based on ECID and OTDOA real time positioning Transmission Block Size UL DL No of Devices 1000bits 2536 bits Improved ToA estimation 680bits 60,680 device/km2 1,000,000 devices/km2 Power Class Power Consumption No of HARQ operations 20dBm/23dBm To Achieve Energy Efficiency Referred as SC-PTM Introduced 14dBm/20dBm/23dBm 2 with Optional support of 2 HARQ with TBS of 1352/ 1800 bits UL/DL Multicasting is done using SC-PTM 1,000,000 devices/ km2 eNB-IoT Positioning utilized for DL transmissions. As CP avoids access stratum security setup thus apposite for SDT (small data transmission) [252,258]. The UP CIoT EPS optimization in comparison to CP reduces less overhead. Data packets are transferred over the radio from MME to SGW and then to PGW. Thus it creates some overhead on building up the connection, however, it facilitates a sequence of data packets to be sent. The performance analysis of CP & UP optimizations was done in . It was observed that CP results in 78% of battery-life-time due to the ability to indicate whether any further transmissions will be done, using RAI (release-assistance-indication). Moreover, CP is not apposite for large data transmissions, as it can handle small data transmissions. Further improved Worked on TDD support FeNB-IoT However, in case of a malicious attack, UE might send data packets recurrently over a short time, this might cause congestion in the network. Hence to effectively utilize the resources, 3GPP introduced two mechanisms for rate control a) APN Rate Control b) Serving PLMN Rate Control. Access Point Name rate control (APN-RC): The APN describes the access point to PDN whereas APN-RC is used by the network to offer a subscribed packet data rate. The APN-RC parameters content is shown in Fig. 20 In TS 124 008 V13.7.0 , it is specified that APN can be 1 octet long or 4 octets long only. This 4th bit represents AER (Additional exception reports) i.e. 0 if additional exception report at maximum rate reached are not allowed and 1 if additional exception report at maximum rate reached is allowed. The MUR (Maximum uplink rate) specifies the restriction on a number of messages a UE can send per unit of time. For example, if UTU (given in Fig. 20) is set to unrestricted, there will be no restriction on the data volume that can be transmitted. UTU is set to unrestricted. Similarly Serving PLMN Rate control (PLMN-RC): confines the upper bound on the number of Non-Access Stratum (NAS) Data PDUs / hour sent in UL and DL directions. 4.1.3. Early data transmission To further, reduce the UE power consumption, 3GPP in rel-15 introduce the concept of EDT i.e. early data transmission. Here the data can now be transmitted during random access procedure in Msg3 itself. The procedure for EDT can be understood as follows, the UE first reads the NPRACH to identify the maximum transmission block size for EDT, and thereafter it indicates that it has small information to transfer via selected preamble. Henceforth, eNB on receiving preamble send a response with transmission block size permitted in Msg-3. In response to this UE transmits the required detail and data with permitted size in the Msg-3. On receiving the Msg-3 eNB keep the UE in idle mode and for further data transmission it will switch the UE to connected mode [259, 260]. Reducing the signaling overhead, EDT, improves the battery life by approximately 3years especially for UE in deprived coverage zone . Besides this, it also improves latency and capacity. Due to improved latency, the NB-IoT can now be used for critical applications also. Hence it can be quoted that EDT, will act as an attribute of NB-IoT RSTDUE = Coexistence with NR Self-organization support Improved multi carrier operations Ability of Inter-RAT selection in idle mode Group wake up signal 4.1.5. Positioning Observed Time Difference of Arrival (OTDOA) Positioning is a DL based positioning method where a UE measures TOA (Time of Arrival) of positioning reference signals (PRSs) received from many transmitting eNBs relative to a reference nodes PRS transmission to measure the RSTD (Reference Signal Time Difference). RSTD (3GPP TS 36.214), is a relative time difference between reference cell (i) and a measuring cell (j) / )2 ( )2 / c xu xj + yu yj (xu xi )2 + (yu yi )2 c + Trxstsf Trxstsf + ej ei and other low power devices to meet the real-time requirements of machine type communication in 5G. (45) The xu = [xu , yu ]T , denotes the unknown 2-D Cartesian coordinates of UE. xj = [xj , yj ]T denotes the 2-D Cartesian coordinates of neighbor eNB j. Trx st sfj , is the time UE receives the start of subframe from cell j. 4.1.4. Rate control in NB-IoT NB-IoT-enabled UE sends data packets sporadically and infrequently. 26 Fig. 19. Protocol stack for control plane CIoT optimization. Trx st sfi , is the time UE receives the corresponding start of one subframe from cell i that has closest time to reception of subframe from cell j. Trx st sfj Trx st sfi , denotes the transmit time offset between eNBs, ideally it will be zero, if network is synchronized and it is required to be known by the location server. Each measured RSTD is translated into a geographical hyperbola to determine the UE position. Thereafter the crossover point of the multiple measured RSTD corresponding hyper bolas is determined to estimate the position of UE. In Eq. (21), (ej ei ), denotes the error in TOA measurement of UE, it specifies the width of hyperbola i.e. uncertainty as shown in Fig. 21. Further for OTDOA in NB-IoT, a new reference signal referred as (NPRS) Narrowband Positioning Reference Signal was designed to improve the hearing ability. As the carrier bandwidth of NBIoT is 180 kHz, thus to ensure good coverage especially in indoor environments, denser NPRS transmissions are required. To accomplish this, the network can schedule NPRS using either Part A or Part B alone, or using both . In Part A to indicate the NPRS sub-frame in one NPRS positioning occasion, a bitmap of length either 10 or 40 is used. Here each bit indicates the NPRS presence in the corresponding sub-frames. NB-IoT UE doesnt use sub-frames that are indicated as invalid are not used for transmission and it doesnt understand the NPRS transmissions. Hence the bitmap of valid subframe (introduced in rel-13 to allow the network to reserve some sub-frames) is used to indicate the sub-frames containing NPRS and marked as in-valid DL sub-frames. These NPRS sub-frames indicated with Part A occur in all radio frames without any long-term periodicity and their positioning occasions are not required to be consecutive. Fig. 21. OTDOA positioning. synchronization signals (NPSS/NSSS), and system information (SI) will consume a large part of DL resources. Hence in Release-13, the multi carrier operation was introduced to improve the capacity. Non-Anchor Carrier is used for offloading the data and an anchor carrier to convey the essential physical signals required for cell selection. However, re striction of performing paging and random access on anchor carriers limits the capacity . Hence to achieve the uneven paging load distribution among available anchor/non-anchor carriers, it was pro posed to use Non-Anchor carriers also for paging and random access procedure, in Release-14 which in turn would also increase capacity by increasing the resource and spectrum availability. This was achieved by using weights for carriers and at max 16 carriers can be configured for this process [267,251,255]. 4.1.8. Low device complexity and cost NB-IoT is designed to handle mass volume business thus device cost is kept significantly low. To achieve this NB-IoT device design is kept simple. The NB-IoT device operates in Half Duplex mode, hence cant receive and transmit simultaneously. Thus omits the requirement of an expensive duplexer filter. Further, UL/DL bandwidth is restricted to 180 kHz in NB-IoT, thus a less complex transceiver is used which further reduces the device cost. Apart from this NB-IoT doesnt support a higher modulation scheme than QPSK, thus keep device complexity low and thereby cost. Besides this to keep the PAPR (peak to average power ratio) low in UL, /2-BPSK, /4- QPSK is used. NBIoT supports LowData-Rate applications, which obsolete the requirement for highcapacity flash memory hence reduce the chip area and thereby the cost of devices . 4.1.6. Multicast Addressing data to a set of users in a single transmission is effectively useful for some of the IoT use cases like firmware update of multiple smart meters or switching on or off of street lamps, etc. NB-IoT makes use of SC-PTM (Single Cell Point-to-Multipoint) to provide multicast services through single cell transmission. SC-PTM reuses eMBMS (enhance Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Services) architecture (Fig. 22) . 4.1.7. Anchor and non-anchor utilization The physical layer of NBIoT is based on OFDM and requires a bandwidth of 180 kHz for both DL & UL. The continuous broadcast of Fig. 20. APN,RC Parameter content. Fig. 22. eMBMS architecture. 27 4.1.9. Coverage enhancement The NB-IoT UE derives the coverage level based on NRSRP estima tion that is influenced by the channel condition. To serve devices especially, in deep coverage areas like the basement. NB-IoT requires to reach up to 164dB of MCL (maximum coupling loss). Because of this, the major technique specified in Release-13 is to increase the number of retransmissions (For the UL communications, 128 repetitions are allowed whereas for DL communication 2048 repetitions are allowed). Based on repetition required three coverage classes are defined given in Table 7. However, for this NB-IoT certainly entails an ample amount of network resources. Besides other critical issues that will arise are severe interference leading to blockage of eNB receiver. connected mode. LTE, DRX at max extended for 10.24 s. However, eDRX can extend sleep cycles for minutes and hours. Hence to attain syn chronization between the network and device after extended sleep mode, Hyper System Frame Number is used. Therefore, it can be stated that power saving is directly proportional to eDRX time . 4.1.12. Wake up radio In rel-15, to further reduce the power consumption by efficient paging monitoring, 3GPP introduced a wakeup signal for NB-IoT. The wake-up signal contains time gap between the end and the start of the wake-up signal first PO of the numerous POs (paging-occasion), that UE shall monitor. This information is utilized to evaluate the start of the subframe. However, it was observed that in Machine type communica tion, the wake-up signal, undesirably wakes up all UEs that monitor the associated PO. This scenario is referred to as false paging. Hence to reduce the power consumption due to false paging User grouping is introduced in WUS. A lot of discussions are currently going to enhance this feature. 4.1.10. Mobility enhancement To offer mobility and service continuity without additional device power consumption some modification was done to the conventional approach. As it was observed that using a conventional approach of connected mobility, signaling overhead increases, which will over shadow the benefits offered by the CP IoT optimization. Hence when ever radio link failure occurs the device need to follow these steps 4.1.13. NPRACH enhancements for range and reliability NPRACH is being enhanced or updated to achieve two objectives. Objective-1, to support a cell radius of about 100km. Objective-2, to reduce the false alarm due to inter-cell interference Objective 1: Due to heterogeneous network users need to camp on the different cell with a different range, hence to clamp on the cell with a 100 km radius, NPRACH range needs to be enhanced. As NPRACH range is constrained by two aspects, a) Timing advance: which indicates the index value TA used by MAC entity to govern the size of timing adjust ment. For RAR (Random Access-Response), an eleven-bit timing advance command is used, where index value can range from 0, 1, 2 1282. The time required for alignment is evaluated as follows s. Authors in evaluated that cell range of 100086,96m can be achieved corresponding to 11bit timing advance command. Hence, another factor cyclic prefix needs to be amended. b) A cyclic prefix (CP): NPRACH can have a maximum CP length is 266.7 microseconds corresponding to this at max a cell range of 40 km could be attained. Hence to achieve a cell-size of ~ 100 km one approach is to use the initial two symbols as addition CP which would result in CP length of 800 s. corresponding to this new CP length a cell range will extend to 120 Km. The other approach is to introduce another NPRACH subcarrier spacing of 1.25KHz accompanied by a larger CP length. Objective-2: To reduce the false-alarm detections due to inter-cell interference. The NPRACH preambles from two cells are identified based on the disparate frequency-hopping pattern. Yet, due to interference from the adjacent cell, there are times when energy based decisions might go wrong. However, with repetitions, the SNR will improve and the SNR expectation value will be equivalent to n repetitions made. Fig. 24 de picts the possible false alarm scenario. Hence to overcome this Huawei suggested applying Symbol-level scrambling, Ericsson suggested Pair wise symbol-level scrambling, and LGE, Samsung, and Nokia suggested Step1 The device needs to request for RRC Connection Reestablishment and further to retain the S1 connection S1-eNB Control-Plane-Relocation Indication procedures are introduced. Step 2 Further, these UE doesnt support AS security, thus to maintain the authentication a NAS based security token is sent in the RRCConnection-Reestablishment Request. Step 3 If UE gets the authentication, the MME starts the ContextRelease-procedure to release S1-connection in the previous eNB. Before this MME initiates the CP Relocation procedure to retrieve the non-delivered NAS-PDUs. 4.1.11. Power saving mode (PSM) and extended discontinuous reception (eDRX) to extend battery life of device To attain a battery life of ten years NB-IoT uses two features i.e. PSM and eDRX (Fig. 23 (A) shows the PSM and Fig. 23 (B) eDRX mode) . Using PSM, NB-IoT device goes into deep sleep mode and doesnt receive any signal, although it remains registered with the network. In that way when the device wakes up, PSM eradicates the requisite of connection re-establishment. Thus it not only assists in power saving but also helps in eluding network congestion. An NB-IoT device switches to PSM, by proposing two timers active timer i.e. T3324, and extended timer i.e. T3412 and it is attached to tracking area update (TAU). In release-13 the active state (T3324) maximum time limit given was approximately 186 minutes (~T332, whereas max sleeping time (T3412) allowed, was max 413 days. Though, the network decides whether to assent the offered timer-values or not. However, non-reachability for a short period immediately after wake up is the crucial challenge using PSM. Thus it is required to optimally decide the timer values, to attain a tradeoff between responsiveness and device PSM time. To further improve the power saving capability eDRX is used. eDRX is the extension of LTE DRX mechanism. The DRX is of two types one for idle mode and the other for a connected mode of the device. eDRX further extends the sleep cycle for both but more in idle mode than in Table 7 Coverage classes . Coverage class Maximum Coupling SubcarrierSpacing Received Power Level CE-Level 0 Normal CE-Level 1 Robust CE-level 2 Extreme 144 dB 15kHz High 154 dB Better than 164 164 3.75kHz Fig. 23. PSM and eDRX modes to save power, [Source: https://www.rohde-sch warz.comRohde &Schwarz]. 28 using Symbol group scrambling. selection of operational mode is a critical process as it can impact the quality of service, the total cost of ownership, and also impact network dimensioning. The advantage of this high-flexibility due to spectrum reframing will support NB-IoT deployment in the upcoming 5G network. Standalone mode reframes the GSM/UMTS carrier or uses a spectrum dedicated for NB-IoT to carry NB-IoT data/signaling traffic. For the coexistence of NB-IoT and GSM, operators need to reframe the two consecutive GSM carriers . The occupied bandwidth for each NB-IoT carrier in standalone mode must be less than the channel bandwidth. Fig.25 (a) depicts the relation between channel bandwidth and Tx BW (transmission-bandwidth). Using Standalone operation mode 10 years of battery life can be ach ieved [253,277]. Besides this Standalone mode also offer lower latency in DL by consuming more power. Currently, the issue of power leakage to adjacent PRBs is being looked upon by companies to reduce their impact In-Band mode: shares the LTE resource block.by deploying the NBIoT carrier within the LTE carrier (Fig. 25(b)). Primarily the LTE bands that are not used to transmit the SIB-1 are ultimately used for NBIoT in-band deployment. This enhances the spectrum efficiency. However, In UL transmission there will be interference between NB-IoT and LTE (in single tone transmission mode i.e. with 3.75 kHz of subcarrier-spacing), (Fig. 26). Guardband mode: locates the NB-IoT carrier in the unused spectrum of LTE carrier. This mode is beneficial for IoT device with low throughput requirements. Further, in DL transmission using guardband allocation, interference impact is mitigated. As NB-IoT channels and other LTE channels will be orthogonal. It is analyzed in a case study that this mode helps in actually helps in supporting massive devices. This is economical also as it doesnt require any additional hardware . 4.1.14. Small cell support To improve the local coverage of NB-IoT end devices deployed deeply indoors, small cell support is introduced in rel-15. The number of repetitions in uplink and downlink for small cells is not incremented. Small cell support will lead to better uplink resource utilization, will provide ease of cell identification. Besides this leveraging its offloading potential, the power consumption of the device will reduce, hence prolong device lifetime. However, densified small cell network will in crease the probability of inaccurate RSRP measurements. 4.1.15. Coexistence with NR In release 15 New Radio (NR) was introduced and this is considered a stepping stone for 5G. The aggregated bandwidth for 5G NR can be as high as 6400 MHz, Latency ratings are better, too, with 5G NR offering a control plane latency of 10 ms compared to LTEs 20 ms, and user plane latency of 0.1 ms to LTEs 0.85 ms. The network power savings are higher, too, with 5G NR supporting above 99% sleep. 5G NR includes several features that will enhance performance in higher portions of the spectrum, increase data rates, improve spectral efficiency, and reduce latency. As both NB-IoT and NR are two independent technologies, their co-existence needs to be considered. One issue that will arise due to their coexistence will be severed collisions between UL traffic of NB-IoT and NR due to the repetitive transmission of NB-IoT device. A suggestion is proposed in proposed to mute the UL traffic for NB-IoT. 4.2. Cell selection criteria for NBIoT The cell will be selected only if the received level of signal level (CSdB RX ) and received signal quality is greater than 0dB. 4.4. NBIoT research challenges CSdB RX > 0 CSqv > 0 The received level of signal level (CSdB RX ) is evaluated using Eq. (46) and CSqv is evaluated using Eq. (47) compensation Qoffset RX = RSRP mRX P temp(dB) 4.4.1. Reduce congestion to handle massive connectivity NBIoT could support 52K devices per cell-site. This massive con nectivity is feasible due to multitone & single tone transmission flexi bility of NB-IoT. However, when a considerable number of devices perform simultaneous channel access, congestion will occur. This will ultimately degrade network performance. The condition will become more severe due to the bounded resource availability. Hence efforts are required to develop efficient scheduling algorithms and traffic models to (46) WhereRSRP , is received signal received power, mdBm RX is minimum required received level in the cell, Qoffset temp(dB) is a temporary offset applied to a cell. Further, to limit the uplink transmission power of UE, P max is utilized to evaluate, Pcompensation , (the detail of P max is given TS 136 331 V13.0.0) The cell quality constraint is evaluated using Eq. (47) offset dB CSqv = Qqual RSRQ mql Qtemp(dB) (47) Here Qqual RSRQ represent the quality value of the received signal and mql , represents the minimum quality level required. 4.3. NB-IoT deployment modes and their bandwidth requirements There are 3 operational modes in which NB-IoT can be deployed i.e. Standalone, In-band, Out-band, based on spectrum availability. Optimal Fig. 25. NB-IoT, Modes of Operation (a) Stand Alone mode (b) In-band Mode (ETSI TS 136 141 v13.6.0). Fig. 24. False alarm problem ( ). 29 secure transmission or other alternates must be identified and devel oped. To overcome the life threatening challenges that security breaches can cause especially in smart health applications. alleviate the congestion problem 4.4.2. Device in deep indoor coverage suffer more latency Though NB-IoT offer extended the coverage of +20dBm than GPRS. However, the UE present in deep indoor coverage area have to do multiple repetitions, thus obviously experience long transmission times, then UE present in good or normal coverage range. One solution to this issue is to use stand-alone for UE in bad coverage range and inband for UE in good coverage range. This would help in avoiding blocking of a user in the normal or good coverage area by users in the deep coverage area. Besides this, it can help in avoiding interference also. 4.4.3 Latency and battery lifetime tradeoff. The nodes that bear the highest path loss need to do repeated transmissions. This consequently surges the energy consumption and latency of NB-IoT system. The level to up-to which, the system will be affected, hinges on the scheduling of UL/DL channels. Hence solution must be identified to achieve a tradeoff between latency and battery lifetime. 4.4.7. Optimal offloading decisions Fog computing /edge computing/ cloud computing all three reduce the computational task, that device or user terminal needs to perform. However, all three will impact the battery life, depending on the ability of the device and its position in the network. Hence AI/ML must be used to take decisive steps regarding offloading of data at which level so that battery power must be used optimally. 4.4.8. NB-IoT service during mobility NB-IoT does not support handover during mobility but supports cell reselection in connected mode. However, the delay introduced during the cell reselection process drains the battery also. Besides, some ap plications require a connection on the go. Hence some energy efficient solution must be identified for this. 4.5. Recent contribution to improve the performance of NBIoT 4.4.4. Firmware and hardware optimization to improve battery life NB-IoT module is required to register to NB-IoT network and activate the default EPS bearer for each reporting, the battery life is drastically reduced from 12 years to merely 1 year. We have found out that this repetition of network attach and detach is quite common for most firmware in microcontroller interfacing with the 2G/3G embedded module. Thus, we need to avoid this when interfacing with NB-IoT module . Due to its cost efficacy, lots of industries are investing in NB-IoT. As discussed above it is dominating the other competitive LPWAN tech nologies effectively. However, to make NB-IoT fully efficient before its massive role out, lots of efforts are being put in by research academia and industries. In this section the recent contributions to make NB-IoT more energy efficient are discussed. To do an accurate estimation of device position using NB-IoT, authors in proposed a robust algo rithm EM-SIC that efficiently estimates the position of the device. This algorithm cancels the successive interference that occurs due to time delay and conjointly estimates the time of arrival corresponding to each of the cells detected & frequency offset. Besides this to keep the device complexity low while assuring that lifetime of ten years, the authors also suggested interpolating the positioning reference signal correlations rather than up-sampling the received samples in digital-domain that results in high power consumption. The authors observed using the proposed algorithm, significant SNR gain can be achieved. Another novel approach is proposed in to ameliorate the ToA estimation. As ToA significantly impacted frequency-hopping-pattern (FHP), of Narrow-Band Physical Random Access Chanel. The longer the hopping distance more accurate is ToA estimation. The proposed approach explores all feasible FH distances, without the supplementary overhead. Hence improves the performance of NB-IoT. Further taking the advantage of mobile edge computing and NOMA authors in proposed a novel model for NB-IoT networks that conjointly reduces the interference impact and optimizes the allo cation of computation resources to finally reduce the task execution latency. This will also enhance battery life as the device will remain active for less time as a task will be accomplished in less time. Another parameter that impacts battery life is reliability. Authors in ac counting proposed an ML based approach that ensures improved reli ability with a reduced number of repetitions required by restricting devices to opt the optimal channel based on two aspects its availability and coverage conditions. This efficient channel selection will improve reliability and thus battery lifetime. Massive connection in NB-IoT network would result in massive data traffic, hence scheduling can play an impressive role in the effective management of traffic to overcome the issue of congestion and reduce latency. Authors in proposed all together three algorithms to overcome the issue of network congestion. To achieve the objective first optimized cluster is evaluated then priorities are assigned to each cluster according to the waiting time. Finally based on waiting time the service is allocated by BS. Hence it was observed, network congestion is reduced effectively. Another approach to improve reliability using scheduling is proposed in and together with this proposed a relay approach to further reduce the power consumption. The authors observed a 65% 4.4.5. Coexistence with LTE/UMTS/GSM The adjacent cell leakage ratio can help in determining whether two technologies can co-exist or not. As NB-IoT has deployment flexibility, thus all results in different CLR values. The simulation study carried out in has identified that in standalone mode in UL there is little impact of GSM/LTE/UMTS on NB-IoT performance. Another simulation study carried out for in-band revealed that it would have a severe impact on the first PRB. Hence the issues of coexistence of NB-IoT and LTE and coming 5G also need to be studied. 4.4.6. Security vulnerability Although NB-IoT operates in a licensed band and offers sim level security. Yet the diverse device configuration makes the network quite vulnerable to threats. As authentication between two communicating parties needs to be maintained which becomes a troublesome task. Furthermore, as NB-IoT is a low power technology, thus it utilizes UDP for connection. Hence data become visible during the transmission, which makes it highly vulnerable. Hence encryption techniques for Fig. 26. ICT sector emission . 30 improvement in energy consumption. Authors in , proposed a mechanism that reduces the NB-IoT radio transmissions energy con sumption by enhancing the scheduling request procedure. The proposed mechanism envisages the processing delay and pre-allocate the radio resources for UL transmissions. A noticeable percentage (34%) of energy consumption is reduced. Another delay optimization technique is pro posed in that conjointly optimize delay reduces the power con sumption using effective offloading and scheduling decisions. Furthermore, an approach is proposed in to improve link reli ability while ensuring a good battery life of IoT devices that opportu nistically use the vehicle mounted relay for transmission. The authors observed that reliability of connection established, communication EE, and transmission-latency, all are optimized, but it greatly depends on the number of availability of vehicle base stations. Security plays a significant role in all communication scenarios. Authors in studied the impact of malicious node and proposed a trust model that forms D2D coalition based on social awareness. According to the proposed model whenever paired nodes upload the data, if eNB detects some malicious it will modify the reliability level, reputation value of that node in its matrix to avoid any further coalition with that node. The authors observed that the proposed model enhances network reliability and re duces energy consumption. Authors in also highlighted the importance of security for efficient utilization 5G-M-IoT applications and proposed a new security framework to achieve the highly required SON capabilities that filter the traffic and detects the possible attack in time. Authors in explored the SCA-with NBIoT scenario and highlighted that security breaching can occur while offloading data onto SCA. Hence, the authors proposed an offloading scheme that not only assures secrecy but reduced the power consumption of the device Most of the NB-IoT devices dont have enough hardware capabilities that are required to perform spectrum sensing. Thus to efficiently utilize the spectrum resource, authors in proposed to combine the NB-IoT with cognitive radio technology. The authors analyzed the throughput potential of combining NB-CR-IoT system corresponding to two sensing techniques i.e. collaborative and autonomous and observed that both of the considered sensing techniques results in similar throughput for under-loaded network. Whereas for the overloaded network scenario, autonomous is preferred. A relaxed environment and collaboration can be used in a strict environment. Another effective resource utilization scheme was proposed in where the user in the idle state allowed to transmit small data packets without a radio resource connection process. The proposed scheme enables the device to notify the eNB about the size of data and its ID to resolve the contentious issue. It was observed that 60% more users can be supported by the proposed scheme. Multiple Access schemes play a crucial role in wireless communica tion. These technologies enable the network to support multiple users at the same time/ frequency/code. Authors in proposed an NB-SCMA scheme to enhance the capacity and coverage of the 5G-IoT network. The proposed objectives were achieved due to ultra-low bandwidth of subcarriers that enables to achieve enhanced coverage while consuming less power and the overlapping ability of SCMA enable to support a large number of users. Another approach is proposed in that leverages the NOMA advantages. The proposed approach groups the MTC device to form the NOMA-clusters and rank these de vices based on intra-cell transmission power, interferences, and QoS requirements. Thereafter the resources are allocated to each cluster as per their requirements, which is then shared among members of the cluster. Authors in evaluated the optimized PSM duration that consequently minimizes the energy consumption and total delay ac cording to user requirements. Authors in proposed an algorithm that utilizes D2D link opportunistically to reduce the transmission delay time together with energy consumption. Authors in proposed an energy efficient D2D enabled solution to improve link connectivity and link capacity of NB-IoT network. The proposed solution foster to use UE social information to form trust based D2D links so that socially aware reliable topology can be formed. Besides this, efficient spectrum utilization is also addressed. Further to overcome the preamble collision an enhanced access reservation protocol is proposed for NB-IoT in . The proposed protocol transmits only a partial preamble that can degrade the detection probability thus a tradeoff is maintained between misdetection and collision . The summary of above discussed algorithm with the parameters optimized is discussed in Table 8. The Authors observed that integrating or utilizing few techniques can further optimize the NB-IoT performance significantly. Such as D2D, multiple access schemes such as NOMA, SCMA, transmission through relay, social aware connection establishment, cooperative transmission, scheduling, crowd sensing. However, till now very few studies on the compatibility and coex istence of NB-IoT with other technologies have been done. In the real scenario, the usage of heterogeneous technologies will be a big chal lenge. Hence more efforts are required in this domain. 5. Role of renewable energy for sustainable development in ICT Presently, ICT accounts in the range of 5% - 9% of electricity con sumption, which may escalate up to 20% of total electricity consump tion in 2030 . Based on a recent report provided by NOKIA, it has been found that approximately 29%, 13%, 11%, and 47% of the total GHG emission of ICT is from Data Centre, Fixed network, Mobile network, and User device respectively . The ICT industry is aware of the prospective rewards of renewable energy sources to make future systems sustainable. A lot of research is going on to suggest sustainable ICT solutions. The existing literature suggests that renewable energy is not only applicable to large-scale applications like telecom base stations (BS), but can also be applied to devices like electric vehicles, sensors, etc. In Data Centres: - In the modern era, with the integration of IoT in our day to live aspects, cloud-computing-platforms have become critical cyber infrastructures. Since the backbone of cloud systems, data centres act as large energy consumers in todays power grids. It is predicted that by 2030, the data centers may use in the range of 3% to 13% of the global electricity production . Authors in stated that due to the upsurge of the Industrial Internet of things the data centre energy needs can rise to 752 TWh in 2030, and this will be equivalent to 2.13% of available global electricity. Hence, in order to meet the growing energy demand of DCs, and reduce to high use of fossil fuels generated energy, renewable energy sources are also integrated with DC. In view of this pioneer work has been done in the recent literature. Author in also proposed to endure the DCs energy consumption with the renewable energy source. For this authors designed a renewable-energy-aware-multi-indexed job classification and a scheduling approach that allocates the incoming workload to those DCs which have a sufficient amount of renewable energy to handle the incoming jobs. Whereas when renewable energy would not be available, at that time stored energy is utilized. Since en ergy generated fluctuates a lot, the Author in designed a game based bargaining approach to efficiently utilize renewable resources. Authors in proposed an AI based solution to effectively utilize the renewable energy generated and highlighted the AI benefits in reducing the DC cost. The author in proposed a queuing based model, that distributes the first model to REG with maximum energy and distributes the left to one with minimum energy. In Mobile networks, Base Stations are the substantial energy con sumer, with ~75% to 80% of total energy consumption . Thereby powering Base Stations with renewable energy sources such as photo voltaic systems, wind turbines can help in slashing energy consumption. Nokia Siemens Networks has developed a green BS that depends on the amalgamation of wind and solar power to elude using grid electricity. A solely wind-powered tower for wireless base stations of cellular net works is developed by Ericsson. Green energy such as sustainable bio fuels, solar and wind energy are promising options to save the on-grid 31 Table 8 Recent contribution to improving NB-IoT performance. Para-meter Technique/ Algorithm/Model Objective Solution Output Ref Time of Arrival EM-SIC To improve the TOA estimation for accurate positioning of NBIoT device while keeping the device complexity low In this proposed technique the author has estimated the time of arrival of P cells and then iteratively canceled the successive interference to get a refined time of arrival estimation. Freq-Hopping pattern To estimate the time of arrival precisely, without additional Task execution latency NOMA&MEC To reduce the latency in task execution by using mobile edge computing and NOMA UCB (Upper Confidence Band) Algorithm To enhance the coverage while reducing energy consumption. congestion NCAK IPGNTQ & SANTQ To reduce the network congestion by scheduling the uplink traffic Energy M2M Relay To optimally select the relay node for transmission to reduce the power consumption by reducing the number of repetition To dynamically distribute the resource among relay and base station Authors suggested a rule to discover all the possible frequency-hopping-distance for subcarriers in NPRACH where hopping distances are evaluated using modulo operation. This in turn will reduce the estimation error. The proposed algorithm alleviates the computational complexity of small base station (SBS) so that latency time can be reduced and resources can be allocated optimally. In view of this each new NB-IoT device that joins the network needs to notify its CSI & data size to SBS. Thereafter SBS revaluates the SIC order based on estimated execution time. Henceforth SBS envisages the data rate for transmission and also computes the resources to be allocated to devices accordingly. Based on this evaluated order and transmission rate now all device transmit their data simultaneously to SBS for computation at edge. Author suggested using a reinforced learning algorithm to select the optimal channel for transmission instead of existing scenario of retransmission. To select the optimal channel, rewards are assigned to channel (0 or 1) which are updated depending on reply from the Base Station. Other than this probability of channel availability, Number of repetitions required using the available channel are also considered for optimal channel selection. Authors propose a priority based scheduling strategy. Where firstly devices are clustered using K-means algorithm and thereafter priority is assigned to each cluster. Finally, priority is assigned to each task in the buffer queue and corresponding to the priority assigned the base station scheduler allocates services to each of these tasks. It was observed that using this algorithm network congestion can be alleviated effectively. Authors suggested, to compare the number of repetitions required if the sensor transmits the data without using relay and with using relay. Thereafter for fair selection of relay node is made. Authors suggested to use the crowd-sensing opportunistically to transmit vehicle data to network using vehicle mounted NB-IoT relays. The detector is designed for the time of arrival estimation with proposed EM-SIC instead of up-sampling, algorithm has low complexity. As it interpolates the receivedsamples correlation values. This algorithm outperforms the existing ToA detectors and improved SNR significantly. The retransmission due to the absence of ACK gets reduced hence Random Access performance improved using proposed solution. Relay assisted Crowd-sensing Battery life time PEBMS to decrease the number of Scheduling-request-procedures so that battery life can be enhanced. The proposed approach works in two phase firstly the proposed architecture with two new identities the packet inspection and prediction entity (PIE), (PPE) perform the indepth analysis of UL packet. PIE analyses the paging delay in power saving mode and transfers this information to PPE which maintains the order of their occurrence. Hereafter in the second phase the processing delay is predicted using phase one information. Finally, eNB transmits the desired information in DL packet to UE and assigns the resource before conventional scheduling procedure steps. Authors observed that NOMA outperforms TDMA and FDMA if used with the proposed approach to reduce task execution latency. The proposed approach ensures reliable transmission thus reduce the number of repetitions required which leads to reduce The network congestion is reduced, throughput improved and energy gain increased using D2D and relay based communication Using the proposed approach authors observed 65% of energy consumption will be reduced. Using NB-IoT, dense sensor traffic can be handled with the proposed approach while assuring link reliability and energy efficiency with battery life time of 10 years or more. Using the proposed approach PBESM prolonged battery life by reducing the energy consumption in radio transmission. A noticeable amount of 34% energy consumption is reduced. 32 Table 8 (continued ) Delay and power consumption CTMDP (Continuous time markov decision process) To reduce the total delay time and power consumption A significant improvement was observed in delay time and power consumption D2D based content uploading to reduce the impact of malicious nodes in the network Traffic filtering To protect against attacks using traffic filtering system. Traffic offloading with secrecy SoITPM To minimize the power consumption of smart device for traffic offloading with constraints to maintain secrecy. Using the proposed approach the time required for uploading content is improved and thus reduce the energy consumption while filtering out the malicious nodes in the network The complex filtering rules, capable of handling such traffic, are evaluated in the kernel space with minimal overhead It was observed that as the traffic load increases the power consumption of device increases, hence small cell access points can reduce the traffic offloading impact using dual connectivity, but it is desired that adequate secrecy must be maintained, to avoid undue wastage of power. Security optimization NB- CR -IoT To achieve maximum throughput of NarrowbandCognitive-Radio-IoT network Authors studied data offloading and multiuser scheduling problems together. Here offloading decisions are taken locally i.e. depending on the ability of device the computation task is offloaded on to the edge cloud, if the possible device must execute the computation task on its own else it must be offloaded. Whereas scheduling decision is taken based on bidding by IoT devices that have empty transmission queue Authors proposed a solution that uses social awareness of device to determine the neighboring device reputation and reliability. To form the D2D trustworthy pair for cooperative content uploading. Authors proposed a framework to provide timely security to multitenant 5G-based IoT traffic using SON capabilities based on effective traffic filtering. Author proposed an algorithm that minimizes the power consumption due to traffic offloading. This algorithm allocates the power desired based on traffic demand while maintaining the adequate secrecy requirement. Besides this Authors have also analyzed the multi-smart device scenario with Smart Device-Access Point pairing. Authors did the rigorous analysis of collaborative and autonomous sensing for secondary users i.e. Cognitive Radio IoT users in the Slotted ALOHA network. scheme Control Plane To improve the radio resource utilization and hence increase the number of device that can be supported Authors observed that both collaborative and autonomous sensing techniques result in similar throughput for under-loaded network. Whereas for overloaded network scenarios, autonomous is preferred for a relaxed environment, and collaborative can be used in a strict environment. The proposed solution has improved the reliability of transmission and thus the number of retransmissions required is reduced as a result authors observed that in comparison to the existing scenario 60% of more devices can now be supported. Dense Connectivity Narrowband SCMA To extend the coverage for low cost, low power devices and also to support massive connections in 5G Authors observed that the proposed solution doesnt degrade the link level performance but improved the coverage and massive connection by 300% Resource utilization and throughput NOMA clustering To optimize the resource utilization for MTC and improve the UL data rate of device. Optimal resource allocation increase the number of users that can be supported by network while assuring QoS to each device. PSM duration Optimized model max-EDR and min-EED The longer PSM time duration will only escalate the average delay without having a considerable impact on reducing energy consumption. The quality of service is improved as latency is reduced. Latency and Lifetime duration To optimize the PSM duration such that a trade-off is attained among energy consumption and delay. To maximize the expected delay ratio and minimize the end-to-end delay. Authors have proposed a solution where device in an idle state can transmit the small data packet without RRC connection setup. To do that authors suggested using new parameters such as the size of small data for transmission (SDT), SDT ID, RA preamble group for SDT. Thus user in an idle state when wish to transmit the data it will look for RA preamble and check for data size and is feasible with a request for uplink scheduling to eNB by transmitting the RA preamble. Hence eNB on receiving it correctly or incorrectly will acknowledge the reception to Authors proposed to use both SCMA scheme and narrowband frequency localized pulse shaping for UL communication. This enables user to use variable bandwidth depending on their channel conditions. NOMA shared single subcarrier among multiple devices hence could support massive connections. The proposed approach clusters the devices to form NOMA cluster and then rank the device depending on interference level, transmission power, and quality of service requirements. Based on the cluster requirements the resources are allocated and then shared among cluster Author evaluated the preference of user for delay tolerance and energy consumption. Used Semi-Markov-Chain model for energy Authors proposed an algorithm that utilizes D2D link opportunistically to reduce the transmission delay time together with energy consumption. Depending on the channel state or pilot signal strength, either UE transmits the data to the BS directly or via D2D link. However, D2D does add to waiting time, and its transmission through is not 33 allocation SAGA To optimize the spectrum utilization, reduce transmission delay while exploring the social awareness of device collision probability E-ARP To reduce the collision probability and utilize resource optimally highly reliable Hence proposed algorithm required UE to first determine the wake-up time of first and then transmit the data packet. Authors proposed a framework where data is uploaded in a cooperative manner using D2D based relay selection. Moreover, the transmission links are opted here based on transmission power and possible interference constraint. Authors proposed to virtually partition the preamble sequence (PPS) such that the same preamble sequence can be used multiple times by several devices. Although, PPS degrades the detection performance, but results in the reduction of collision. Moreover to balance the detection performance transmit power of PPS is increased energy consumed by BSs and reduce the CO2 footprint. Author in found that utilizing solar-powered cellular BS system in South Africa can results in 49 % reduction in operating cost compared to fossil fuel based energy. Authors in proposed a layer learning approach to reduce the power grid brown energy utilization. It was found that by integrating neural networks, authors have not only improved the throughput but have successfully been able to reduce the grid power utilization up to 50%. Since energy generated from onsite renewable energy sources fluctuates over multiple and its also difficult to deal with the variation of renewable energy availability and demand for energy. To overcome this issue utilizing the partial information of harvested energy and traffic information, authors in proposed an energy management algo rithm DRTEMA that outperforms the existing solution in terms of reduction in total energy cost of hybrid energy powered CN. This algo rithm procures the information Author in presented a green so lution for reducing the power consumed by small cell base stations. For this authors have proposed a binary particle swarm optimization algo rithm that considers the traffic offloaded from macro base station to small cell base station and battery level. Utilizing this they obtain the activation time for SBS and time for their sleeping. Overall the proposed algorithm has reduced the grid power utilization. Further significant efforts are also being made to transform the power grid into the Smart Grid. Traditionally to cater to the customer demands power grid energy was managed. Whereas, in SGACN, BSs consider themselves part of the grid and are involved in supporting it by reducing their energy Several advantages SG offers are environmental protection, reduc tion in transmission losses, high efficiency. However, there are certain challenges associated with SG, such as Interoperability, Secure Network communication, Diverse application user operational requirements validation, Performance metric identification, to respond to the power demand efficiently when power reliability is at risk. Designing of new storage capabilities for efficient distribution of stored energy to the end user. Considering the benefits of SG, a lot of research going on to overcome its challenges. Some of the recent pioneer work is discussed as follows. Author in utilize the discontinuous transmission technique (that sends the part of BS to sleep mode) and along with this utilized Lagrangian dual method (that reduce the signaling overhead), to reduce the smart grid energy procurement and also to slash the GHG emissions. The author in proposed dynamic programming based, adaptive ON/OFF switching of BS along with this a policy for grid energy pur chase is presented. Firstly, the optimal BS is identified, thereafter considering the current storage level and future renewable energy levels the purchase decisions are taken. Overall this approach results in A noticeable improvement was observed in the link connectivity, network throughput, energy efficiency, and link capacity The proposed approach reduces the probability of mis-detection for light system-load and in contrast to this reduces the collision probability for heavy systemload. Thus resources also get optimally utilized. significant energy saving. Further author in proposed a hybrid energy (i.e. SG and RE) powered BS cost reduction approach BAPA that reduces battery damage, ensures QoS to the user, and also reduces grid energy consumption. Furthermore, in order to reduce the momentary imbalance between SG supply and demand (also known as ancillary services), Authors in proposed an approach that firstly based on resource demand switches off the BS not needed, secondly utilizing energy management policy decided whether to use locally generated renewable energy or harvest it, based on SG request. As a result, authors found that utilizing proposed approach the ancillary service demand responding probability increased up to 90%. Overall their proposed approach can not only help MNOs in achieving cost reduction but can also enable them to generate revenue. From the above discussion, it has been found that the proliferation of ICT in diverse sector i.e. from smart home to smart building, smart transport to smart health, etc. can certainly help in the reducing their corresponding power grid energy consumption. However increased data generation and digitization may lead to a rise in data center & BS electricity consumption, but to overcome this local renewable source energy is being used at BS/Network, at Device, at Data center. Besides this paradigm shift toward the Smart grid is further enabling Green ICT Further, to keep the temperature, rise below 1.5 degrees, the developed countries and non-developing countries are making contin uous efforts to reduce GHG emissions by providing the overall energy supply to consumers using renewable resources. According to IEA, from 1990 to 2019, it has been seen that overall electricity generation from a renewable source in China increased by 16.85 times, in the US increased by 1.85 times, in Canada increased by 1.417 times, and in Brazil increased by 2.28 times (as shown in Table 9). 6. Conclusions The ICT sector has refurbished the way organizations work, improving productivity, and producing better economic output and trade across the globe. But at the stake of environment stability, i.e. by emitting GHG, the amount of GHG emission by ICT own sector will scale aggressively in coming years due to the proliferation of ICT services. However, the paradigm shifts of ICT toward renewable energy source utilization ensuring the reduction or slashing of electricity consumption generated from nonrenewable sources. The integration of ICT in other sectors such as logistics, traffic management, education, health, agri culture, etc. will assist in reducing corresponding carbon emission. This survey paper discusses the green of ICT techniques that reduce the energy consumption of eminent contributors of ICT, i.e. Data Centers, Access Network, Base stations, and smart user devices/ sensors. Besides 34 Table 9 Paradigm shift of developing countries toward renewable energy generation . Country China US Canada Brazil 1990-1991 (Mtoe) 2018-2019 (Mtoe) Oil Coal Hydro Wind & Solar 118.788 756.843 76.514 58.894 530.516 460.119 24.26 9.671 10.896 23.487 25.515 17.774 0.033 14.425 0.002 0 609.959 795.689 106.63 104.997 1979.524 277.572 15.28 15.479 103.113 23.726 32.829 34.211 81.12 46.73 3.345 6.343 Table 10 Abbreviation list. Abbreviation Meaning 3GPP ICT CO2 GHG BLE C-RAN CSI D2D edRx eMTC HetNet IMT-A IoT ITU LTE M2M PSM QoS RSSI Tx D-E2AHMS S2S DC NT BS LPWA 3rd Generation Partnership Projects Information and communication Technology Carbon die oxide Green House Gas Bluetooth Energy Cloud Radio Access Network Channel State Information Device To Device Extended Coverage GSM Extended Discontinuous Reception Enhanced Machine Type Communication Heterogeneous Network International Mobile Telecommunication Advance Internet Of Things International Telecommunication Union Long Term Evolution Mobile To Mobile Power Saving Mode Quality Of Service Received signal strength indication Transmission Deep recurrent Neural Network Energy Efficient Adaptive Health Monitoring System Sensor to Sensor communication Data Centre Base station Narrow Band IoT Low power wide area network the emission of GHG. Thus to subside this energy consumption Aerial base stations (ABS) in form of UAV mounted with Radio Resource Head will be used. In addition to this Cell shaping techniques are used that include cell breathing and cell switching on/ OFF based on traffic analysis. Mobile edge computing, Fog computing is already reducing the burden on device and centralized data centers. To further optimize this phenomenon, regional and name based cloud services can be used. So that computation power required by fog cloud must be reduced and latency time can be improved. This would impact UE life and data center computational requirements. Artificial intelligence will also play a significant role, in the fight for a sustainable planet. Monitoring with intelligence will bring knowl edge to the user either in terms of awareness or alertness. However, it makes the world more prone to security attacks. Hence Security is a major research challenge for the telecommunication industry. As highly secured data needs to be deciphered at the receiver end which will further augment the power and increase latency too. Recovery of waste heat from Data centers, buildings, commercial industries, not reduce the cooling requirement of DC, but its reutilization at societies, in turn, abates the GHG emission. However, the biggest challenge in this is site selection for their deployment and the additional burden for DC operators to guarantee the availability of power besides focusing on the computational task. The field of Green ICT is quite broad and recently getting a lot of traction from industry and research academia. Its potential to assist in achieving environmental sustainability must be explored effec tively using green technologies like NB-IoT. Declaration of Competing Interest this, this survey also deliberated NB-IoT a greener physical layer solu tion that meets all the requirements of massive IoT applications, such as low power consumption, low data rate, latency insensitive, low cost, and extended coverage, especially in the basement. In addition to this also highlighted the role of renewable energy in ICT, The facts learned from this survey are: Author declares that there is no conflict of interest of this manuscript in any form. References Wu, et al., An overview of sustainable green 5G networks, Wirel. Commun. 24 (4) (2017) 7280. Report Ericsson energy and carbon report including results from the first ever national assessment of the environmental impact of ICT, November, 2014. Jinsong Wu, Sundeep Rangan, Honggang Zhang, Green Communications: Theoretical Fundamentals, Algorithms, and Applications, CRC press, 2016. Shakir, et al., Green heterogeneous small-cell networks: toward reducing the CO2 emissions of mobile communications industry using uplink power adaptation, Commun. Mag. 51 (6) (2013) 5261. Wu, et al., Green data center placement in optical cloud networks, Trans. Green Commun. Network. 1 (3) (2017) 347357. Atat, et al., Green massive traffic offloading for cyber-physical systems over heterogeneous cellular networks, Mob. Netw. Appl. (2018) 19. Maqsood, et al., Leveraging on deep memory hierarchies to minimize energy consumption and data access latency on single-chip cloud computers, Trans. Sustain. Comput. 2 (2) (2017) 154166. Zhang, et al., Hero: hierarchical energy optimization for data center networks, Syst. J. 9 (2) (2013) 406415. Holtkamp, et al., Minimizing base station power consumption, J. Sel. Areas Commun. 32 (2) (2013) 297306. Marz, et al., Reducing event latency and power consumption in mobile devices by using a kernel-level display server, Trans. Mob. Comput. 18 (5) (2018) 11741187. The report, The role of ICT in reducing carbon emissions in the EU, Br. Telecommun. (May 2016). The techniques used to abate DC generated carbon emission can be classified into two parts based on techniques to reduce power con sumption and others based on managing power, utilized for cooling. Further, to provide quality of service to users, data is now being hosted in a decentralized manner instead of keeping it in a central ized manner. However, as a result of this, numerous new Data Cen ters were established, which would further add to GHG emissions. Thus currently virtualization at three levels i.e. storage, network, and the server is done to slashing carbon emission. Adaptive power consumption techniques can reduce energy con sumption, such as dynamic provisioning at the data center that turns on the limited number of servers to save energy. However, this will overburden the active servers, which might lead to a temporary shutdown. Hence adaptive power consumption techniques must be used with the integration of prediction based analysis, to schedule and quantize the required energy consumption level. Access Networks densification will improve the spectrum efficiency but at the same time augment the power consumption that leads to