A systematic literature review on green software metrics

Green IT is getting increasing attention in software engineering research. Nevertheless energy efficiency studies have mostly focused on the hardware side of IT, the software role still requires deepening in terms of methods and techniques. Furthermore, it is necessary to understand how to assess the software greenness for stimulating the energy efficiency awareness, since early phases of the software lifecycle. The main goal of this study is to describe and to classify met rics related to software greenness present in the software engineering literature. Furthermore, this study analyzes the evolution of those metrics, in terms of type, context, and evaluation methods. To achieve this goal, a systematic literature review has been performed surveying the metrics claimed in the last decade. After examined 960 publications, we selected 23 of them as primary studies, from which we isolated extracting 96 different green metrics. Therefore, we analyzed search results in order to show what is the trend of research about green software metrics, how metrics perform measurement on re sources, and what type of metrics are more appealing for de ned contexts.

Reducing energy consumption and carbon footprint, in or der to achieve high levels of sustainability, are some of the challenges that the IT community is pursuing to deal with environmental issues generated by IT systems. Indeed, re search community is performing a huge e ort to detect the main reasons of energy consumption and a number of stud ies have been published in this speci c theme. Moreover, a model to identify energy consumption sources and measure the utilization of energy is necessary, in order to generate a plan to reduce energy consumption. However, most of the studies focus on the hardware perspective of energy consumption measurement. The aim of this work is to identify energy consumption met rics related to the software perspective and to classify these metrics in order to de ne the utilization purpose, the kind of measurement results, and the environment in which they are used. In order to achieve this goal, we perform a systematic review about green software metrics in the software engineering literature. First, we de ne our research questions and, hence, our search strategy, identifying a set of suitable keywords to execute the search on a predefined set of data sources. Then, we select a number of primary studies that are compliant to a predefined set of inclusion and exclusion criteria. Furthermore, we extract metrics from these primary studies and classify them with respect a predefined set of subjects. Finally, we show the results of our work, and then we analyze these results in order to show which is the trend of that research about these metrics has been focusing on, how these metrics perform measures on related resources, and which metrics are more appealing with respect to their environment. We organize the content of this paper as follows: in Section 2, we describe in detail the research method we used, eliciting research question and de ning the review protocol; in Section 3, we show the results of our search and the classical cation of found metrics; in Section 4, we analyze the results in order to investigate metric properties, common features and utilization; in Section 5, we state our conclusions and discuss about possible applications and reuse of our work.

In this work, we showed how many green software metrics are claimed in the software engineering literature. Further more, we showed how these metrics can be classified in terms of measured resources, kind of results (type), environment or application domain (context), and usage. Moreover, we verified that research community is focusing on metrics strictly related to energy consumption and saving dimensions. In addition, we found out that claimed metrics show how IT resources utilization is relevant for measuring energy consumption and how much energy may a ect sys tem performance. Furthermore, we showed which resources are more measured and how the metrics calculate their energy consumption. In addition, we showed which metric types are more attractive for defined contexts, discussing which metrics are expected to be de ned for contexts that are not explored. The metrics classification   of this work is useful to quickly access to the most important software energy consumption metrics claimed in the software engineering literature. Furthermore, the results of this study represent a starting point for those that are interested in creating models or perform ing measurements about energy consumption of software. Indeed, these results allow the readers to select accurately the right set of metrics that is more appropriate to their needs, in terms of context, type and resources to be measured.