Green Measurement Metrics Towards a Sustainable Software: A Systematic Literature Review

With the advancement in computing hardware’s the complexity and energy consumption of software has increased largely. There are various primary studies which uses different software measurement metrics in green and sustainable software development. In this paper we systematically reviewed and analyzed different green measurement metrics in sustainable software. Our objective is to find the recent studies in green metrics and find the different state-of-the-art measures that is taking place in green software development and engineering. We reviewed 14 studies with different aspects of green metrics and sustainable software. This review summarizes different green metrics and methods proposed in the recent years.

Keywords— green measurement metrics sustainable software

The Green House Gas(GHG) and CO2 emission is matter of great concern for environmental sustainability. These emissions are having different sources of origin. One of the major reason is electricity power generation using non renewable sources (e.g. coal, gas). ICT is among one of the major consumer of electrical energy [1]. The most important components of ICT is it’s hardware and software. Though software’s directly do not consume power but they are indirectly responsible for power consumption due to its execution in hardware’s. Now with the development of hardware the complexity of software’s running in those systems has increased in manifolds. Poorly designed and developed software’s makes it difficult to maintain and increases the power consumption of hardware’s. Sustainability in terms of energy efficiency is one of the area where studies are taking place in the software engineering research field at present. Many software based empirical studies has been conducted and being carried out to make software’s more energy efficient. These studies has considered many metrics to measure greenness of the software and to develop an energy efficient, sustainable software. It is necessary to have a cumulative view of those works to find their effectiveness and what metrics has been worked on to address the energy consumption issues. Also what aspects have been considered, what degree of effectiveness the studies have, what are their limitations and what aspects are there that is yet to be addressed.

From the review it is observed that most of the studies related to green metrics in the sustainable software field is on energy consumption metric. The measurement methods for energy consumption are based on mostly estimation based. There is few studies on software code profiling for energy efficient and energy aware based software design methods. In our future work we will conduct a review on larger scale to cover all the scopes of software sustainability measures and there adoption in the industry.

From the extracted and processed data it is found that green metrics in sustainable software area considers energy metrics as one of the best measure for achieving sustainability in software. Other metrics like the environmental attributes and qualities are not considered in many studies. It is observed that studies are conducted and proposed to make energy efficient application by creating energy-aware software. Studies are also considered for software sustainability in different domains such as Mobile, Network and Datacenters. The metrics energy and performance are the most studied ones, there is less study in other aspect of software sustainability such as pollution, recycling of software. Study in this less researched aspects of sustainable software along with the energy aspects can help in achieving long-term solution for sustainability in software development.
