2015 1st International Conference on Futuristic trend in Computational Analysis and Knowledge Management (ABLAZE-2015) Green Cloud Computing: A Review on Green IT Areas for Cloud Computing Environment Yashwant Singh Patel#1, Neetesh Mehrotra*2, Swapnil Soner#3 # Department of Computer Science, Chameli Devi Group of Institutions Indore *School of Computer Engineering KIIT University Bhubaneswar, India practices through some Green initiatives. The rest of this paper is structured as follows: In section 2 a brief introduction of Cloud computing is given. Basic principles and concepts of Green computing are discussed in section 3. Section 4 gives a complete review on Green IT areas for cloud computing. A comparative study of Green IT areas for cloud computing is elaborated in Section 5; It also discusses various research issues and some significant results of this survey. Finally a concluding remark of this paper is given in last section. AbstractWith the increasing growth of large data storage and computational demand, Green Cloud Computing is known to be a broad area and hot field for research. To capitalize various IT resources, Cloud computing has produced an ultimate and impressing way to virtualize servers and data centers and to make energy efficient. The IT resources consume huge amounts of power and energy, which in turn produces shortage in energy and change in global climate. Therefore, there is a need of Green cloud computing which can produce solutions that can not only make the IT resources energy efficient but also minimize the operational costs. To solve environment related issues in the field of IT, Green IT is named to be an important step. It includes a huge number of focus areas for instance to provide proper management of power, virtualization of servers, design of data centers, recycling methods, eco-labeling, environment sustainability design and energy efficient resources etc. In this review firstly, a brief discussion on Cloud and Green computing is given then various application areas of Green IT are discussed and reviewed further. Based on the comparative analysis on Green-IT areas several research issues related to concerned Green IT areas, Objectives of such areas etc. are elaborated further. II. CLOUD COMPUTING Cloud computing is an another type of distributed and parallel computing and a superset of Grid computing. It is known to be an evolving paradigm of equal resource sharing among the nodes. It is a recently developed technology based on pay-per-use model. It provides a use of energy-efficient, price effective technologies which helps during accessing, sharing of services and storage and management of resources . The advantages of cloud computing is access of network, infrastructure sharing, saving of cost, maintainability, reliability, flexibility, location autonomy and wide-variety of services etc. Keywords Cloud Computing, Green Computing, Green IT, Energy Efficiency, Power Management, Virtualization. A. Services of Cloud Computing Cloud is referred to a pool of Data centers on which various Services are deployed through Internet. Such services are broadly categorized in 3 categories: SaaS (Software as a Service), IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service) and PaaS (Platform as a Service) as represented in Fig. 1 . In, SaaS service model the consumers acquire the potential for accessing of application or service that is deployed on the cloud such as Salesforce.com. In PaaS, consumers acquire the potential for accessing platforms so that they can deploy their applications and softwares in the cloud. While in IaaS consumers acquire the potential for controlling and managing the systems in provisions of storage, connectivity of network, applications and operating systems, but can't controlled their selves the infrastructure of cloud. The other service such as CaaS (Communications as a Service) is known to be a subset of SaaS which is particularly related to market or industry and used to depict hosted services of IP telephony . I. INTRODUCTION In last few decades the day-to-day demand and usage of cloud computing in IT areas makes it compulsory to think towards the Green IT areas so that the energy and power can not only be minimized but can also be used for the purpose of recycling. Generally, Cloud exhibits the large amount of numerous data centers and servers to fulfill the huge amount of customers based on pay-per-use methodology. Such resources are spanned in large area and consume huge amount of power for networking devices, cooling technologies, monitors and farms of servers etc. Therefore to make these resources green by using Green technologies have become a primary purpose of various organization of both government as well as industries. Because of the environmental perspective, Green IT and to deal with IT related environment issues Green IT offers a large amount of methodologies and 978-1-4799-8433-6/15/$31.002015 327 Authorized licensed use limited to: Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT. Downloaded on July 31,2025 at 19:26:21 UTC from Xplore. Restrictions apply. B. Deployment Models of Cloud Computing The deployment of cloud computing is varied based on the requirements and based on these requirements the deployment models can be categorized into four types such as Private Cloud, Public cloud, Community cloud and Hybrid cloud as shown in Fig. 2. These models are described as follows: S A P I Collaboration Business Processes Fig. 2. Deployment Models of Cloud Computing i) Private Cloud: It is deployed, controlled and maintained for a particular organization or a company. CRM/ERP/HR ii) Public Cloud: It is available for commercial basis which allows the users to build up and deploy a service the environment of cloud. Industry Applications Web 2.0 application runtime Middleware iii) Community Cloud: It is utilized by number of organizations which are having common needs and interests. iv) Hybrid Cloud: It exhibits a number of clouds with different types but having the potentiality through their interfaces to allow and move applications or data between one to another cloud. It can be a combination of two or more clouds. Java runtime Database Data center fabric Servers Networking Storage Fig. 1. Services of Cloud Computing Hybrid Cloud Public Internet Cloud Services Public Cloud Enterprise 2 Fig. 3. Application Areas of Green IT Private Cloud in Enterprise III. GREEN COMPUTING This section gives a brief discussion on origin, definitions, Green IT, applications of Green IT and need of Green IT as follows: Enterprise 1 328 efficient and economically reliable. While offering the Cloud services, the service provides should be ensured that they can provide energy efficient services with economical cost. But the challenging and complex task is to lower the usage of energy of data centers. As data are growing exponentially, the Green Cloud computing having issues related to infrastructures for computations that can not only minimize the consumption of energy but can also make the Cloud services reliable and economically efficient. A. Origin The origin of Green Computing is started in 1987, when the report named "Our Common Future is issued by the World Commission. It basically stated the idea about "sustainable development . In 1992, one consumer Energy Star plan is launched by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) . The purpose of this is to minimize the consumption of energy it was primarily for computer products. B. Definitions Green Computing refers to the efficient use of computers and other technologies with respect to environment so that the primary goals such as energy efficient peripherals, improve the consumption of resources and electronic waste can be satisfied. These goals will not only make the resources more efficient but also enhance the overall performance. IV. REVIEW ON GREEN IT AREAS FOR CLOUD COMPUTING There are number of authors who have worked in Green computing areas with respect to Cloud Computing. Table I represents the work done in terms of concern area of Green IT for Cloud computing. A year-wise study from 2009 to 2014 is given. It is shown with concern area of Green IT and Objectives which have focused to work towards the Green Cloud Computing. The Results of this survey are shown in the next section. In the technical way, the Green Computing can have 2 aspects: (i) For software technology the purpose is to create such methods that can enhance the efficiency of program, storage and energy. V. RESULT ISSUES: RESULT OF THIS SURVEY After reviewing various areas of Green IT, In this section the primary objectives which are focused by various researches while working towards Green Cloud Computing are identified. Many areas are already explored and there are some other areas which are yet to be explored and to be worked further. While (ii) In hardware aspect there is need of such technologies which can not only minimize the consumption of energy but also make it economically efficient with the help of recycling . C. Green IT Green IT, is a development and proposal of new computing models that used to make the IT resources more energy efficient both in terms of cost and power. While using the IT resources there are number of key areas that should be taken care. The Primary key areas of Green IT are discussed Table II depicts the primary objectives which are in concerns and pretend to be more important for Green Cloud Computing. In Table II, following assumptions are used: and D. Application Areas of Green IT Green IT spans a number of areas that are needed to be focused as shown in Fig. 3, such as: : Right symbol depicts that it is taken as objectives : Blank space for not considering as an objective. For instance, in Table II, S1 shows that it is study 1, in which power management and energy efficiency are taken as primary objectives. The purpose of this study it to show that which objectives are most important and which objectives are still needed to be worked further. i). Proper management of power ii). Virtualization of servers iii). Design of data centers iv). Design of recycling methods VI. CONCLUSIONS v). Eco-labeling for IT products Now a day as large data storage and computational demand is growing. Green Cloud Computing is known to be a broad and suitable area for research. To take advantage of various IT resources, Cloud computing has generated an ultimate and impressing way to virtualize servers and data centers and to make it energy efficient. It is nothing but known to be Green Cloud Computing. It focuses various areas such as power management, energy efficiency, virtualization of servers etc. In this paper a brief discussion on Cloud and Green Computing is given. vi). Environment sustainability design vii). Energy efficient resources These areas are needed to be taken under consideration, while using the IT resources. E. Need of Green IT for Cloud Computing In modern world, where the data centers and servers are remotely controlled under the Cloud Computing models there is a need of Green Computing to make these more energy 329 emissions, virtualization of servers and management of servers are very rare objectives which are used in studies and needed to be explored further. After a brief discussion, a year-wise review on Green IT areas for Cloud computing is represented. This study is based on concern are of Green IT and different objectives. From this review it is observed that energy efficiency and power management are taken as common and important objectives. In this study it is also observed that to sustain the natural resource, to provide green and cost efficiency, reduce carbon TABLE I. A BRIEF REVIEW ON GREEN IT AREAS FOR CLOUD COMPUTING Year Concern Area of Green IT Objectives 1) 2014 2) 2013 3) 2013 Power Management Energy consumption and CO2 emissions To use renewable energy in the cloud data centres. To use cloud computing in construction management. Energy efficiency To discuss key issues and challenges for an energy efficient cloud storage service. 4) 2013 Power Management, Green house gases and Energy efficiency 5) 2013 6) 2013 Sustain the natural resources 7) 2013 The reduction of the energy consumption by data centers 8) 2013 To provide green and cost-efficiency 9) 2012 Energy efficiency, Green house gases 10) 2012 Survey on Data centre, Minimizing CO2 To present new ways of enhancing power performance of data centers, cloud application etc. To design and analyze Storage Area Network model for energy consumption with the help of Green-Cloud simulator. To propose an IT architecture for healthcare based on the triple challenge of sustainability, privacy, and cloud computing. To use stochastic service decision nets to investigate energy-efficient speed scaling on web servers. A synergistic cloud where the pricing plan, scheduler, and the charge-back model work in tandem with each other to provide green and cost-efficient computing options and incentives to the environmentally friendly and cost-conscious endusers. Based on the fact that resource utilization directly relates to energy consumption, they have successfully modeled their relationship and developed two energy-conscious task consolidation heuristics. Overview is given on green metrics that are applicable to data centers. 11) 2012 Energy and Power Management 12) 2012 Energy Efficiency 13) 2011 Virtualization of Servers 14) 2011 15) 2011 16) 2011 17) 2011 Energy efficiency and Power Management. 18) 2010 19) 2010 20) 2010 21) 2009 22) 2009 Virtualization of Servers, Carbon emissions Sustainable Distributed Data Center prototype Power consumption, Energy saving and CO2 emission Reducing the rate of emission of carbon dioxide and Energy Important metrics of cloud computing are described that makes it greener. Various power, energy models and major challenges are identified to build a model for Green Cloud. To analyze the carbon footprint and utilization rates in a data center. The longterm goal of this work is to give data center administrators an enhanced perspective of data center operations to allow for more energy efficient operation, to lower the carbon footprint, and to promote green data centers. To highlight the emergence of Green IT as a result of the increasing trends in power consumption and discussed a number of measures for efficiency improvements. An overview on the importance of implementing green IT, the significant and growing role of IT and data centers in the worlds consumption of electric energy and carbon footprint is described. A generic protocol is proposed for resource allocation, which can be instantiated for specific objectives such as minimizing power consumption through server consolidation, while satisfying a changing load pattern. Energy consumption is analyzed based on types of services and obtain the conditions to facilitate green cloud computing to save overall energy consumption in the related information communication systems. The goal of the algorithm is to minimize the energy consumption in task executions in a cloud computing environment and It also applies the concept of active cooling control in order to minimize power consumption. To reduce energy consumption using virtualization clique star cover number technique. Management of servers running in free cooling conditions Vision for energy efficient management of cloud computing environments Cloud computing as an ideal solution is proposed to resolve challenges in e-government including Green ICT maintenance. A Cloud service selection framework is presented to save energy. 330 Studies Power Management Energy Efficiency Sustain the Natural resources To provide Green and Cost-efficiency Reduce Carbon Emissions Virtualization of servers of Servers S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S8 S9 S10 S11 S12 S13 S14 S15 S16 S17 S18 S19 S20 S21 S22 TABLE II. A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF GREEN IT AREAS FOR CLOUD COMPUTING REFERENCES Rawai, N.M., Fathi, M.S., Abedi, M., Rambat, S., "Cloud Computing for Green Construction Management,"2013 Third International Conference on Intelligent System Design and Engineering Applications (ISDEA), 16-18 Jan. 2013, pp.432-435. M.S. Fathi, M. Abedi, S. Rambat, S. Rawai and M.Z. Zakiyudin, "Context-Aware Cloud Computing for Construction Collaboration", Journal of Cloud Computing, vol. 2012, pp. 1-11. Rimal, B.P., Choi, E., and Lumb, Ian., "A taxonomy and survey of cloud computing systems", In Proceedings of the 5th International joint conference of INC, IMS and IDC, 2009, pp. 44-51. http://searchcloudcomputing.techtarget.com/definition/cloud-computing P.Srinivasa Rao, K.Thammi Reddy, MHM.Krishna Prasad,"A Novel Approach for Identification of Hadoop Cloud Temporal Patterns Using Map Reduce", IJITCS, vol.6, no.4, pp.37-42, 2014. C.J. Anumba, J. Pan, R.R.A. Issa, I. Mutis, "Collaborative project information management in a semantic web environment", Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, vol. 15 Issue: 1, 2008, pp.78 - 94. Introduction to Cloud Computing- white paper, "http://www.dialogic.com/~/media/products/docs/whitepapers/12023cloud-computing-wp.pdf" Sumit Goyal,"Public vs Private vs Hybrid vs Community - Cloud Computing: A Critical Review", IJCNIS, vol.6, no.3, 2014, pp.20-29. Guo Bing, Shen Yan, and Shao ZL, The Redefinition and Some Discussion of Green Computing, Chinese Journal of Computers, vol. 32, Dec. 2009, pp. 2311-2319. Zhang Juntao, Urban and regional sustainable development, Dongbei University of Finance and Economics Press, 2008. US Environmental Protection Agency, "http://www.epa.gov". Mydhili K Nair, Dr.V.Gopalakrishna, Generic Web Services: A Step Towards Green Computing, International Journal on Computer Science and Engineering, Vol.1, Mar. 2009, pp. 248-253. 13-Sergi Figuerola, Mathieu Lemay, Victor Reijs, Michel Savoie, Bill St.Arnaud, Converged Optical Network Infrastructures in Support of future Internet and Grid Services using IaaS to Reduce GHG Emissions, Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 27, Dec. 2009, pp. 1941-1946. Wei Deng; Fangming Liu; Hai Jin; Bo Li; Dan Li, "Harnessing renewable energy in cloud datacenters: opportunities and challenges," Network, , vol.28, no.1, January-February 2014, pp.48,55. Negru, C.; Pop, F.; Cristea, V.; Bessisy, N.; Jing Li, "Energy Efficient Cloud Storage Service: Key Issues and Challenges," 2013 Fourth International Conference on Emerging Intelligent Data and Web Technologies (EIDWT), 9-11 Sept. 2013, pp.763-766. Jain, A; Mishra, M.; Peddoju, S.K.; Jain, N., "Energy efficient computing- Green cloud computing," 2013 International Conference on Energy Efficient Technologies for Sustainability (ICEETS), 10-12 April 2013, pp..978-982. Ikram, M.; Babar, Q.-U.-A; Anwar, Z.; Malik, AW., "GSAN: Green Cloud-Simulation for Storage Area Networks," 2013 11th International 331 Conference on Frontiers of Information Technology (FIT), 16-18 Dec. 2013, pp.265-270. Godbole, N.S.; Lamb, J., "The triple challenge for the healthcare industry: Sustainability, privacy, and cloud-centric regulatory compliance," 2013 10th International Conference and Expo on Emerging Technologies for a Smarter World (CEWIT), 21-22 Oct. 2013, pp.1-6. Tian, Y.; Lin, C.; Chen, Z.; Wan, J.; Peng, X., "Performance evaluation and dynamic optimization of speed scaling on web servers in cloud computing," Tsinghua Science and Technology , vol.18, no.3, June 2013, pp.298-307. Rini T. Kaushik, Prasenjit Sarkar, and Abdullah Gharaibeh, "Greening the compute cloud's pricing plans". In Proceedings of the Workshop on Power-Aware Computing and Systems (HotPower '13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2013. Yamini, R., "Power management in cloud computing using green algorithm," 2012 International Conference on Advances in Engineering, Science and Management (ICAESM) , 30-31 March 2012, pp.128-133. Cavdar, D.; Alagoz, F., "A survey of research on greening data centers," 2012 Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 3-7 Dec. 2012, pp.3237-3242. Priya, B.; Pilli, E.S.; Joshi, R.C., "A survey on energy and power consumption models for Greener Cloud," 2013 3rd International on Advance Computing Conference (IACC), 22-23 Feb. 2013, pp.76-82. Michael Pawlish, Aparna S. Varde, and Stefan A. Robila, "Cloud computing for environment-friendly data centers", In Proceedings of the fourth international workshop on Cloud data management (CloudDB '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2012, pp. 43-48. Lu Liu; Masfary, O.; Jianxin Li, "Evaluation of server virtualization technologies for Green IT," 2011 6th International Symposium on Service Oriented System Engineering (SOSE), 12-14 Dec. 2011, pp.7984. Lamb, J., "Green IT and use of private cloud computing in South Africa," 2011 8th International Conference & Expo on Emerging Technologies for a Smarter World (CEWIT), 2-3 Nov. 2011, pp.1-6. Yanggratoke, R.; Wuhib, F.; Stadler, R., "Gossip-based resource allocation for green computing in large clouds," 2011 7th International Conference on Network and Service Management (CNSM), 24-28 Oct. 2011, pp.1-9. Kiran, M.; Ming Jiang; Armstrong, D.J.; Djemame, K., "Towards a Service Lifecycle Based Methodology for Risk Assessment in Cloud Computing," 2011 Ninth International Conference on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing (DASC), 12-14 Dec. 2011, pp.449456. Daniel Guimaraes do Lago, Edmundo R. M. Madeira, and Luiz Fernando Bittencourt, "Power-aware virtual machine scheduling on clouds using active cooling control and DVFS". In Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Middleware for Grids, Clouds and eScience (MGC '11), ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2011. Yamini, B.; Selvi, D.V., "Cloud virtualization: A potential way to reduce global warming," Recent Advances in Space Technology Services and Climate Change (RSTSCC), 13-15 Nov. 2010, pp.55-57. Witkowski, M.; Brenner, P.; Jansen, R.; Go, D.B.; Ward, E., "Enabling Sustainable Clouds via Environmentally Opportunistic Computing," 2010 Second International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom), Nov. 30 2010-Dec. 3 2010, pp.587-592. B. Gayathri, "Green Cloud Computing", Third International Conference on Sustainable Energy and Intelligent System (seiscon 2012),VCTW, Tamilnadu, India on 27-29 December 2012. M. Pokharel, J. S. Park, "Cloud Computing: Future solution for eGovernance", ICEGOV2009, November 10-13, 2009, Bogota, Colombia. pp. 409-410. Seung-Min Han, Mohammad Mehedi Hassan, Chang-Woo Yoon, and Eui-Nam Huh, "Efficient service recommendation system for cloud computing market", In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Interaction Sciences: Information Technology, Culture and Human (ICIS '09). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2009. pp. 839-845. 332