Green Communications: An Emerging Challenge for Mobile Broadband Communication Networks

Worldwide mobile broadband communications networks are increasingly contributing to global energy consumption. In this paper we tackle the important issue of enhancing the energy efficiency of cellular networks without compromising coverage and users perceived Quality of Service (QoS). The motivation is twofold. First, operators need to reduce their operational energy bill. Second, there is a request of environmental protection from governments and customers to reduce CO2 emissions due to information and communications technology. To this end, in this paper we first present the holistic system view design adopted in EARTH (Energy Aware Radio and neTworking tecHnologies) project. The goal is to ensure that any proposed solution to improve energy efficiency does not degrade the energy efficiency or performance on any other part of the system. Then, we focus on technical solutions related to resource allocation strategies designed for increasing diversity order, robustness and effectiveness of a wireless multi-user communication system. We investigate both standalone and heterogeneous cells deployment scenarios. In standalone cells deployment scenarios, the challenge is to reduce the overall downlink energy consumption while adapting the target of spectral efficiency to the actual load of the system and meeting the QoS. Then, with heterogeneous deployment scenarios, different cell scales that ranges from macro to micro, pico and even femto cells, potentially may share the same spectrum in a given geographical area. In such scenarios interference is the most limiting problem to achieve the desired performance. Our analysis reveals how proposed methodologies permit to achieve notable energy gain over traditional resource allocation techniques especially in not saturated scenarios.

Keywords: EARTH, green communications, energy efficiency, femtocells, interference, radio resource management.

Introduction Telecommunication has experienced a tremendous success causing proliferation and demand for ubiquitous heterogeneous broadband mobile wireless communications. Up to now, innovation aimed at improving wireless networks coverage and capacity while meeting the QoS requested by users admitted to the system. Nowadays, the number of mobile subscribers equals more than half the global population. Forecast on telecommunication market assumes an increase in subscribers, per subscribers data rate, and the roll out of additional base stations for next generation mobile networks. An undesired consequence is the growth of wireless networks energy consumption that will cause an increase of the global carbon dioxide (CO2 ) emissions, and impose more and more challenging operational cost for operators. Communication Energy Efficiency (EE) presents indeed an alarming bottleneck in the telecommunication growth paradigm. Motivated by this scenario, we outline the main investigation axes that may significantly improve the EE of broadband cellular networks, thereby reducing the cost and environmental impact of mobile broadband services. Todays mobile networks have a strong potential for energy savings. The design of mobile networks has until now been focused on reducing the energy consumption of terminals, whose battery power imposes stringent requirements on energy consumption. This has led to a situation where terminal energy consumption is only a fraction of the energy consumption of the mobile network. For example, NTT DOCOMO has calculated that, for their 52 million subscribers in 2006, the energy consumption of their network per mobile user per day was 120 times greater than the daily energy consumption of a typical users mobile phone. The increase in energy consumption of NTT DOCOMOs network over the years from 2002 to 2006 is shown to be directly related to the increase in number of base stations installed. Consequently, the optimization of energy-consumption of radio base stations should have a large impact on the overall EE of the net Green Communications and Mobile Broadband Communication Networks 269 work. As a matter of fact, recent increasing maturity of mobile technology in combination with the growing amount of equipment deployed each year have woken up the need to innovate in the field of energy efficient communications. Three main federative projects that face the challenge of enhancing the EE in mobile wireless broadband networks are: the core 5 Green Radio programme of mobile Virtual Center of Excellence (MVCE) [2, 3], GreenTouch , and EARTH [5, 6]. Energy efficient enhancement in wireless communication can be achieved only if improvements are experienced in the whole communication chain for different operational load scenarios. Several investigations are carried out in this research area, ranging from energy efficient cooling of base stations to innovative energy efficient deployment strategies, and frequency planning. The EARTH project sets a very innovative challenge: development of an holistic methodology to characterize the energy consumption of cellular networks including suitable metrics. Today, there exists no widely agreed methodology to evaluate the energy efficiency of cellular networks. Similarly, meaningful energy efficiency metrics are currently lacking. Both, in conjunction with reference scenarios, will enable a successful evaluation of the energy efficiency of networks. Such agreed methodology will be the enabler of a fair comparison of different concepts and technologies. EARTHs holistic methodology is presented in Section 2. The objective of this paper is threefold. First, we present in detail the holistic system view proposed in the EARTH project, which may allow us to ensure that any proposed radio EE improvement does not degrade EE or performance on the terminal side or any other part of the system. To this end, in Section 2 we present and comment on a unified approach to improve the EE of the whole communication system. We focus on how energy consumption of mobile broadband networks may be significantly reduced in representative traffic scenarios. We consider LTE like systems which face a very challenging multi-user communication problem: many users in the same geographic area require high on-demand data rates in a finite bandwidth with a variety of heterogeneous services such as voice (VoIP), video, gaming, web browsing and others. We will present a holistic optimization methodology that includes socio-economic impact of broadband communication, definition of reference scenarios, and targets and evaluation metrics. Second, we present and benchmark the EE effectiveness of a novel energy efficient Radio Resource Management (RRM) algorithm for OFDMA based systems. Since wireless is a shared medium, the system EE is affected not only by the single user efficiency, but also by the combination 270 of time and frequency allocation according to the momentary instances of the frequency selective channel between the downlink base station and the receiving user equipments. Hence, in order to achieve EE, a system approach is required. In our vision, the multi-user scheduler should indeed allocate time and frequency resources to minimize the transmission energy cost while meeting QoS requirements of all active users admitted by a base station. The momentary system load plays an important role in the overall optimization design. Currently deployed base station are commonly designed so that they can accommodate the traffic demand at peak times. Nevertheless, cell traffic load notably varies during the day. Several researches pointed out that to save energy, base stations should perform a dynamic load and energy state arrangement, which balances extra load on a determined optimal set of base stations, thus maintaining minimum energy consumption. In this paper we do not propose novel dynamic sleep mode of base station components. We focus on resource allocation of active phases of base stations during downlink transmission. We propose a simple algorithm to trade off momentary spectral efficiency for downlink transmission power while meeting the QoS constraints of active users admitted in the cell. To this end, we propose a scheduling algorithm which splits the resource allocation process into four steps. In the first step we identify which entities (packets) are rushing and which are not rushing. Then in step two we deal with urgencies: we assign resources only to entities that have an high probability of missing their QoS requirements regardless to their momentary link quality and their potential to save energy. Then, if any resources (here chunks) are still unscheduled, in the third step we allocate resources to users (non-rushing) with highest momentary link quality, regardless to their QoS constraints. In the fourth step we perform energy efficient link adaptation to save downlink energy. We trade off throughput (lowering the transmission spectral efficiency and allocating a larger number of chunks to UEs) for downlink power by limiting the power budget on each chunk. In this way we attempt to minimize downlink transmission power over a time window, which provides significant additional flexibility to the scheduling algorithm. In addition to throughput, both latency and spectral efficiency enter in the tradeoff. In an extreme case of latency tolerance or low load scenarios, the scheduler could simply wait for the user to get close to the base station before transmitting or allocate all frequency resource to a single packet transmission with significant lowered power. We call the proposed algorithm a Green Adaptive Scheduler (GAS) . Third, we propose an RRM algorithm to improve the EE of a heterogeneous cellular network where macrocells and femtocells share the same 271 spectrum in a given geographical area. In such heterogeneous deployment scenario, interference is the most limiting problem to achieve the desired performance, in terms of both spectral efficiency and energy efficiency. Macro users (M-UEs) close to femtocells experience femto-to-macro interference that may drastically corrupt the reliability of communications. Similarly, neighbour femtocells belonging to the same operators may also interfere with each other, thus creating femto-to-femto interference. Recent economical investigations claim that femtocell deployment might reduce both the Operational Expenditure (OPEX) and Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) for cellular operators (see, for instance, ). A recent study shows that expenses scale from $60000/year per macrocell to $200/year per femtocell. However, according the ABI Research [11, 12], by the end of 2012 more than 36 million of femtocells are expected to be sold worldwide with 150 million of customers. Thus, interdependence between energy efficiency, service constraints and deployment efficiency are not straight forward. Recently some researchers have faced these challenges. In , the authors carry out an energy efficiency comparison between different size cells. In , a theoretical study that describes the effectiveness of NodeB deployment and the system energy efficiency is presented. In , the authors present an energy saving procedure that allows femtocell Base Station (also named FAP or HeNB) to completely switch off its radio transmissions and associated processing when not involved in active calls. In , the authors cope with the problem of interference proposing a time division duplexing underlay scheme in which femtocells reuse the uplink macrocell bandwidth. In , an RRM algorithm that trades off frequency resource for energy is proposed to reduce the interference perceived at both macro and femto users. In , we come out with the design of a simple and effective RRM algorithm (RRM Ghost ), which permits to drastically improve the overall network performance. The proposed algorithm efficiently profit of the unusual communication context of femtocells for which locally few UEs compete for a large amount of transmission resource. In this paper, we investigate the system energy efficiency obtained if the RRMGhost algorithm is implemented at femtocells. A detailed description of the algorithm and numerical results are presented in Section 7 272 Figure 1 Green networks innovation axes.

Holistic EE Optimization Methodology for a Broadband Cellular Network A unified approach to improve the EE of the whole communication system is still missing. Nevertheless, the potential offered by joint optimizations is in our vision the most promising one. Joint optimizations are represented by cross layer optimizations that take component and node architectures as well as radio interface technologies and network architecture into account. We present here the holistic optimization methodology proposed in the EARTH project that is composed of three major investigation axes: EE Optimization Methodology Framework EE Design of Green Networks EE Design of Green Radios These three investigation axes will be the background knowledge for the design of new green network architecture. Figure 1 summarizes the concepts that should be investigated at network level.

Definition of an EE Optimization Methodology Framework Today running broadband cellular networks have been designed to maximize coverage areas and spectral efficiency of communication systems. In such networks EE optimization has not yet played a prime role. Hence, metrics like spectral efficiency, capacity or throughput have been used to characterize usefulness and differences of investigated solutions. Nevertheless, these metrics are not sufficient to judge the EE of a communication system. A fun 273 Figure 2 Framework to enhance the EE of broadband cellular networks. damental analysis of key radio technologies in terms of their EE is lacking. This is partly due to the fact that there are neither suitable methodologies nor metrics established to enable a fair and objective comparison of these techniques. Thus, an important prerequisite for efforts to enhance the EE of cellular networks is to provide a framework to evaluate these technologies. In Figure 2 we summarize the proposed working framework. First, the socio-economic impact of broadband communication system permits to define and forecast targets of energy efficient optimization. Then, the definition of reference scenarios characterizes the specific framework for which some specific EE enhancements are envisioned. Eventually, to evaluate the effectiveness of the EE optimization, targets and evaluation metrics are defined. Today there is not common view on such EE metrics in the wireless community and, a wide range of metrics are used by vendors operators and academia. Since 2009, standardization of energy efficiency metrics has started. One of the major bodies of standardization that is working on the topic is the ETSI Technical Committee on Environmental Engineering (ETSI-TC-EE) . ETSI-TC-EE has started working on the specification of energy efficiency metrics for mobile cellular networks. Up to now, ETSI-TC-EE focuses only on EE metric specifications at component 274 level. Furthermore, criteria related to the quality-of-service are neglected. Nevertheless, to achieve the goal of a holistic network design, EE metrics should also take the following into account: The input power required to generate a specific output power at the antennas. Energy consumed by digital signal processing equipment (interference cancelation techniques, complex decoding, etc.). With this type of metrics, the tradeoff between EE improvement of specific signal processing algorithms and their consumed energy can be understood. Specific metrics on EE of RRM schemes and their related control signalling cost. These types of metrics are worth when the EE analysis of the system considers not only the single-user optimization problem but also the multi-user case. With such a type of metrics we can understand the tradeoff between EE improvement due to multi-user RRM algorithms (such as frequency and packet scheduling, power allocation and power control, etc.) and additional control signalling cost. The energy to deliver data to the base station (backhaul power consumption). The subject of EE metrics is presented more extensively in . The EARTH European project is providing an extensive overview on this topic.

Design of Green Networks Until now, several Radio Access Technologies (RATs) have been deployed in a parallel way, accommodating different service requirements over the same area and providing multi-RAT handovers. Nevertheless, such solutions have stand-alone network planning and resource management methodologies. In our method, the common network design goal has been to optimize the systems capacity and coverage while meeting QoS requirements of different types of applications in very different communication scenarios, ranging from large macro to femto cells for different environmental characteristics. Solutions have been optimized for the high load system operating point. Nevertheless, systems are most of the time offloaded. Very recently efforts are originated for joint management of the multi-RAT technologies focusing on common capacity and coverage optimization . These previous efforts did not include EE considerations and not necessarily resulted in optimal deployment or performance from an energy consumption point of view. Moreover, cellular networks exhibit slowly changing daily load patterns 275 as well as highly dynamic traffic fluctuations. However, currently networks are configured rather statically. Since most of the energy wastage occurs during low load situations, these load variations can be effectively exploited to reduce network energy consumption. Therefore, dynamic load variations should be addressed by energy efficient RRM strategies. Innovative design of green networks would require to innovate in the following three topics: Network Deployment. Network Management. Radio Resource Management.

Network Deployment While a lot of work has been performed on developing throughput, capacity or coverage enhancing concepts for cellular networks, little insights have been gained which techniques can be applied to improve the energy efficiency resulting in less optimal strategies for overall network energy consumption. Moreover, recently the heterogeneous radio access networks (HetNets) concept is under investigation by both academics and industry. The HetNet deployment proposes a flexible and open architecture for a large variety of wireless access technologies, applications and services with different QoS demands as well as different protocol stacks. Wireless networks differ from each other by air interface technology, cell-size, services, price, access, coverage and ownership. The complementary characteristics offered by the different RATs make possible to exploit the deployment diversity gain leading to higher overall performance than the aggregated performances of the standalone networks. Actually, the biggest advantages of a heterogeneous network are the significant gains in network capacity and coverage via aggressive spatial spectrum reuse of available bands. This gain can be exploited to drastically reduce the overall energy consumption of the network. To this end, it is first fundamental to determine the theoretical and practical limitations on energy efficiency of HetNets deployment scenarios. The goal is to understand how to reduce system energy consumption based on deployment strategies using different cell sizes, network topologies, coordination between radio access technologies and investigates network deployments including macro base stations, femto cells, relays and repeaters that share the same spectrum in the same geographical area. Then, the second challenge will be to define how to reduce overall system energy consumption by combining and coordinating different sites and radio technologies. This is the object of EE RRM techniques. Eventually, there is the challenge of designing meth 276 odologies for energy efficient radio network deployments including femto cells, relays, repeaters, distributed antennas, etc. Indeed, an energy efficient network deployment can be design by defining the optimal mix of cell size, share of the common spectrum and, the set of adaptive resource allocation methods that may drive to large EE gains.

Network Management In our vision, innovative network management concepts will lead to large networks energy consumption savings. The challenge is to understand how to tune the radio network nodes in order to achieve gains from coordination between different functions and nodes in the radio network, including the backbone network. The studied mechanisms should enable self EE optimization of the network, requiring only minimal human intervention. The concept is that the system autonomously and dynamically changes the cellular layout of the mobile network according to, e.g., the daily traffic profile. To this end, the design of novel EE network management functions requires to investigate theoretical limits of energy efficient network management algorithms. Then, it is required to understand how overall system energy consumption can be reduced through proper configuration and tuning of radio network nodes, including interaction and cooperation between network elements (including radio, transport and backbone network elements). Furthermore, network management methods for EE multi-RAT coordination should be investigated.

Energy Efficient RRM RRM algorithms have been designed to maximize the system capacity while overcoming the mismatch between requested QoS and limited network resources under full system load. However, system load in mobile systems is dynamic in nature and, traditional RRM schemes are not necessarily efficient at different operating conditions. Novel RRM schemes developed, in addition to load variation, should take into account the characteristics of RF front-end such as Power Amplifiers (PA) as well as uplink and downlink power and bandwidth constraints. This is further enhanced by the development of RRM schemes considering multi-cell cooperation for power control and scheduling transmissions. Moreover, schedulers could attempt to minimize the energy required per correctly delivered information bits, while meeting the QoS of admitted heterogeneous active users. Information theorists have studied 277 energy-efficient transmission for at least two decades [22, 23]. More recently, several researchers have designed solutions to trade spectral and energy efficiency. Single user EE optimization is a vivid investigation topic. In the authors propose to trade off energy for transmission delay. Actually, Shannon theory indicates that it is desirable to transmit a packet over a longer period of time to save transmit energy. The authors consider a single user scenario with single type homogeneous traffic and, propose to scale the modulation down to conserve energy when its buffer is under loaded. When the buffer starts to fill up, the modulation order is increased to avoid long queuing times or buffer overflow. This proposal assumes that power consumption monotonically increases when transmission power increases. Under this assumption, as far as single user QoS constraints are met, power can be minimized by reducing the information rate at the expense of delay. Actually, as wireless is a shared medium, the overall system EE is affected not only by the single user efficiency, but also by the combination of time and frequency allocation according to the momentary instances of the frequency selective channel between the downlink base station and the receiving selected user equipments. Hence, in order to achieve EE, a system approach is required. In our vision, RRM methods such as the multi-user scheduler should indeed allocate time and frequency resources to minimize the transmission energy cost while meeting QoS requirements of all active users admitted by a base station. Up to now this is not the current optimization target. Traditional packet scheduling algorithms are designed to increase the maximum system capacity, subject to QoS constraints and fairness. Nevertheless, most of the time, wireless systems are only moderately loaded. With state of the art priority scheduling algorithms, the exploitation of available time and frequency resources is typically not optimized from an energy perspective. Earliest Deadline First (EDF) schedulers do not profit much from time diversity as much as they should do. Maximum Channel to Interference ratio (MCI) schedulers aim at maximizing the cell throughput regardless of the user QoS and the actual system load, and consequently they are totally insensitive to any time constraints of the data traffic. In not saturated system load scenarios, the exploitation of available time and frequency resources is typically not optimized from a energy perspective. Several researches pointed out that to save energy, base stations should perform a dynamic load and energy state arrangement, which balances extra load on a determined optimal set of base stations, thus maintaining minimum energy consumption. In a simple algorithm is presented to trade off momentary 278 constraints of active users admitted in the cell. The authors propose a novel scheduler, the GAS This is one example of what we can do if we change the optimization paradigm from optimization of spectral efficiency to a balanced tradeoff between energy efficiency and spectral efficiency. Moreover, in case of a multi-user scenario, power consumption of base station can be rateindependent if the system is not heavily loaded. Actually, information rate depends on transmission power but also on the momentary link quality on frequency resources allocated to scheduled users. In , it is recalled that the lowest order modulation should always be used while accommodating the delay constraint to minimize energy consumption. Concluding, EE for RRM algorithms is a vivid research area. Nevertheless there is still a large room for improvement. In our vision it is required to the theoretical limits of energy efficient Radio Resource Management (RRM) algorithms and identification of their main parameters. The fundamental EE versus spectral efficiency tradeoff has not been solved yet. Furthermore, with the introduction of HetNets, an additional dimension to the tradeoff has to be considered: deployment efficiency. Finally, it is necessary to understand how highly dynamic RRM principles can reduce overall system energy consumption in practical systems where signalling overhead can drive to significant EE gain limitations.

Design of Green Radios Additionally, novel technologies and components, as well as energy efficient radio interface techniques must be holistically investigated. Innovative design of green radios would require innovation of the following three topics: Reduction of dissipated power of base station hardware components. Design of link interfaces and application of innovative radio transmission techniques. Energy efficient RRM. Figure 3 summarizes the concepts that we propose to investigate at node and single cell levels.

Reduction of Dissipated Power of Base Station Hardware Components In a green network, depending on the coverage range and momentary utilization ratio of base stations, different peak output power levels will be 279 Figure 3 Green radios innovation axes. required. State of the art Power Amplifier (PA) do not full fill these requirements. Currently available solutions are optimized regarding the power efficiency in maximum load scenarios. However, the maximum load scenario is a rather rare case in typical network deployments of operators. That means that most of the time, the network infrastructure is operated with sub-optimal EE thus leading to a significant waste of energy resources. Therefore, power efficiency of base stations components has significant further improvement potential. Radical new approaches should be envisaged to realize fundamental efficiency improvement. To this end, new configurations of PA should be investigated. Actually, PA should be able to tune the output power for different operating conditions in real time. For instance, power variations at the output of the PA cause impedance variations resulting in antenna mismatch and thereby in power wastage of the overall system. In our vision, joint optimization of PA and antenna networks should be introduced to achieve reconfigurable/tuneable interstate matching networks. Moreover, transceivers should support the scaling of the consumed energy in order to enable the adaptation of energy consumption to actual performance requirements. Such energy scalability should be present in all components (analogue RF front-end, baseband) and in all devices. Furthermore, transceivers should en 280 able dynamic power management in order to keep active only their necessary modules during sleep modes. Indeed, at component level, a key investigation axe is the design of traffic load adaptive base station components, with harmonized solutions for EE control on system level and energy efficient base station components unlocking solutions for EE operation of cellular networks.

Design of Link Interfaces and Application of Innovative Radio Transmission Techniques State of the art radio link designs (such as beam forming, MIMO, adaptive antennas arrays, coordinated multi-point transmission and, advanced retransmission schemes) have been designed to achieve high peak data rates, good coverage and low latencies. As consequence, mobile terminals require to operate periodic control messages and reference signals from base stations. This limits the possibilities for base station sleep intervals in low load scenarios. Consequently, a significant amount of energy today is wasted by not having appropriate base station sleep mechanisms in place. Some researchers have started proposing solutions on isolated aspects and mainly non-cellular systems [2932]. A similar embracing analysis of the EE of radio link technologies for cellular is lacking, despite cellular systems represent the major energy consumers due their universal proliferation. In particular, the aspects of the radio link operation in low load scenarios have not been addressed so far. In order to progress the state of the art on energy efficient radio link technologies, several investigation axes should be explored. First, innovation should achieve joint optimization of energy efficient radio link operation strategies for all load regimes. Second, the specific case of low load and short range coverage such as in femto cells deployment should be extensively investigated.

Green Adaptive Scheduling for OFDMA Based Systems Traditional packet scheduling algorithms are designed to increase the maximum system capacity, subject to QoS constraints and fairness. Nevertheless, most of the time, wireless systems are only moderately loaded. With state of the art priority scheduling algorithms, the exploitation of available time and frequency resources is typically not optimized from an energy perspective. The goal of our investigation is to design an energy efficient scheduling algorithms which meets the QoS constraint 281 of an heterogeneous population of UEs. In system load scenarios that are not saturated, the exploitation of available time and frequency resources is typically not optimized from an energy perspective. Based on these observations, we propose to split the resource allocation process into four steps: Step 1: The Rushing Entity Classifier (REC) classifies entities (packets of UEs) waiting to be scheduled as rushing or non-rushing. With real-time (RT) traffic, packets are classified as rushing if T hrush TTL + RTTL , where T hrush is a threshold on the QoS deadline that depends on the traffic type, TTL is the time to live of the packet, is a constant which takes into account both retransmission interval and maximum allowed number of retransmissions, and RTTL is the remaining TTL. With non-real-time (NRT) traffic, flows and not packets are classified by the REC. Therefore, the ith user equipment (U Ei ) is classified as rushing if one of its NRT flows has been under-served during T Wi . More precisely, every Transmission Time Interval (TTI) the REC checks for each U Ei if (T Wi tnow,i ) (QoSi txdata,i)/Rmin , where tnow,i is the elapsed time since the beginning of T Wi , QoSi the QoS requirements of the UE class of traffic, txdata,i the total data transmitted by user i during (T Wi tnow,i ) and Rmin the minimum active transmission rate of the system (always larger than zero). Note that T hrush, and T Wi are scheduler design parameters. Step 2: Resources (chunks) are allocated to rushing entities with an EDF-like scheduler which allocates best chunk(s) to entities with higher deadline priority. Deadline priority metrics differ between RT and NRT traffics: while with RT traffic deadline priority depends on RTTL , with NRT traffic it depends on the under served data rate experienced by U Ei during T Wi . Step 3: All unscheduled resources (chunks) are assigned to users which maximize spectral efficiency, regardless to any QoS constraints. Priority is granted indeed to UEs selected by standard MCI matrix-based chunk allocation described in . Actually, the matrix contains the metrics k,n (i) of all possible user-chunk pairs (only for previously unscheduled chunks), where at time i, UE k has a metric for chunk n which is given by k,n (i) = Rk,n (i). Rk,n (i) is the instantaneous supportable rate for UE k at chunk n, depending on each UEs Channel Quality Indicator (CQI). At each time i, given an unscheduled chunk n, the scheduled UE is Un (i) = argmaxk k,n (i). Indeed, the Adaptive Modulation and Coding 282 (AMC) algorithm suggests for each U Ek assigned to chunk n the most spectral efficient Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS), MCSk,n , which meets PERtarget . Step 4: We trade off UEs throughput for downlink power by limiting the power budget on each non-rushing allocated chunk. Therefore, in order to meet the QoS constraints while lowering the transmission power budget, a lower MCS order has to be selected for transmission. Two solutions are possible. Either power is lowered to a given low power level, or a target low power MCS is fixed: MCSlowpower . Such MCSlowpower can be for instance suggested by the admission control based on the actual traffic load of the cell. Then, for each U Ek assigned to chunk n, the scheduler scales down MCSk,n to low power MCS (MCSlowpower ) only if MCSk,n > MCSlowpower . Downlink transmission power is indeed reduced for chunks allocated to non-urgent UEs.

Simulation Results In this section we assess the effectiveness of our proposed GAS algorithm (see Section 6) comparing it with two scheduling algorithms often investigated in the literature: MCI, and EDF. Schedulers are compared in different traffic load scenarios in terms of the following power efficiency metric i : KiUE i = j =1 RB Ni,j Pi,j (1) i,j where at TTI i, KiU E , Ni,j , Pi,j and i,j are respectively the number of active UEs in the cell, the number of chunk allocated to user j , the downlink power for transmission on each chunk and the throughput of user j . Schedulers are compared in three traffic scenarios: Scenario A (single real-time traffic): unique VoIP or NRTV traffic type in the cell for all UEs. Scenario B (mixed real-time traffic): coexistence of VoIP and NRTV traffic in the same cell. Scenario C (heterogeneous mixed traffic): coexistence of VoIP and HTTP traffic in the same cell. Simulation results are given for the system and traffic models summarized in Table 1. Note that we simulate the traffic of the central cell, while others 283 Table 1 Main system model parameters. Network Parameter Value Carrier frequency 2.0 GHz Bandwidth 10 MHz Inter-site distance 500 m Minimum distance 35 m TTI duration 1 ms Cell layout Hexagonal grid, 19 three-sectored cells Link to System interface EESM Traffic model VoIP, NRTV Nb of antennas (Tx, Rx) (1,1) Access Technique OFDMA Total Number of Sub-carriers 600 Nb of Sub-carriers per PRB 12 Total Nb of Chunks (PRB) 50 Propagation Channel Fast fading Typical urban 6-tap model, 3 km/h Interference White UE Channel estimation ideal Turbo decoder max Log-MAP (8 iterations) Dynamic Resource Allocation Nb of MCS 12 (from QPSK 1/3 to 64-QAM 3/4) 10 % AMC PERtarget CQI report Each TTI, with 2 ms delay Packet Scheduling EDF, MCI, and GAS Sub-carriers Allocation Strategy Chunk based allocation BSs are used for down-link interference generation only. Results are averaged over 100 independent dynamic runs, where at the beginning of each run UEs are randomly uniformly located in the central cell. Each run simulates 50 seconds of network activity and at each TTI channel realizations are updated. We check if QoS is met based on the metrics defined in [34, 36]. Real-time VoIP and NRTV UEs are satisfied if more than 95% of the UEs have a residual Packet Error Rate (PER) below 2% and their TTL is respectively 50 and 100 ms. In Figure 4 we show our simulation results for scenario A with single VoIP traffic and we consider a number of active UEs in the cell that ranges between 20 to 540. Three scheduling algorithms are investigated under this scenario: EDF (dashed curve), MCI (dotted curve) and GAS (solid curve). Note that 540 satisfied VoIP UEs is the limit with any of the investigated 284 schedulers. The highest system load (540 satisfied active UEs) is achieved with EDF and GAS only. MCI can satisfy up to 450 coexistent active UEs. Such maximum load gap between EDF and MCI is not surprising. Actually, since MCI allocates resources to UEs with better momentary link quality regardless of the user time QoS constraints, with the increasing number of real-time flows, many users may face momentary service starvation and consequently, exceed the maximum delivery delay (50 msec). This is not the case with EDF since it allocated best chunk(s) to entities with higher QoS deadline priority. From an EE point of view, we observe that EDF performs slightly better than MCI. Actually, UEs served with MCI experience an higher average transmission spectral efficiency. This causes an higher energy loss caused by the transmission of padding bits added when a UE has not enough data to entirely fill the allocated chunk(s). Our simulation results show how GAS algorithm permits to notably improve the energy effectiveness. We observe that in low load scenarios (20 active UEs), the  reduction is up to 32.5%, and it decreases as expected for higher number of active UEs, having up to 31, 29, 26 and 21% of energy cost reduction with respectively 50, 100, 200 and 350 (up to 550) active UEs. In Figures 5 and 6 we show our simulation results for scenario B and C, respectively when 75 NRTV (or 100 HTTP in Figure 6) UEs are active and the number of active VoIP UEs ranges between 0 and 250 (or between 0 and 450 in Figure 6). This is a more challenging scenario since the system is heavily loaded and heterogeneous QoS constraints have to be taken into account in the scheduling rule. As in Figure 4, we compare  performance of EDF (dashed curve), MCI (dotted curve) and GAS (solid curve). In case of Figure 5 while MCI cannot satisfy any additional VoIP UEs when 75 NRTV UEs are present in the system (therefore only a dot is represented in the figure), EDF and GAS can satisfy respectively up to 220 and 250 additional VoIP UEs. Simulation results show that comparing EDF and GAS, GAS improves  performance respectively of 18, 16, and 10.5%, with respectively up to 50, 150 and 200 VoIP active UEs. With 250 VoIP UE only GAS can satisfy all active UEs since it is more flexible and effective in mixed traffic scenarios. Finally, in Figure 6 we show our simulation results for scenario C, when 100 HTTP UEs are active and the number of active VoIP UEs ranges between 0 and 450. Again, heterogeneous QoS constraints have to be taken into account in the scheduling rule. With the same trend of results, in Figure 6, while EDF and MCI perform slightly the same (MCI can serve more VoIP UEs), best performance is obtained with GAS. We observe with GAS scheduling a  performance improvements of respectively 30 and 15% with 100, and 285 5 4.75 4.5 4.25 4 3.75 [W/Kbit/s] 3.5 3.25 3 2.75 2.5 2.25 2 MCI 1.75 EDF 1.5 GAS 1.25 1 100 150 200 250 300 350 Number of Voip UEs 400 450 500 Figure 4 Scenario A (single traffic):  performance evaluation with EDF, MCI and GAS schedulers varying the load of VoIP UEs. 200 VoIP active UEs. Furthermore, in scenario C GAS is able to serve up to 450 VoIP, while EDF and MCI can satisfy respectively up to 150 and 250 VoIP UEs. Note that GAS presents some steps in its performance since increasing the number of active users, a smaller room for modulation scaling of non-urgent UE is experienced.

Ghost Femtocells for Energy Efficient Heterogeneous In our view, femtocells should be invisible in terms of interference generated to neighbour cellular users. Nevertheless, femtocells deployment presents a very challenging issue: while HeNBs power consumption and interference range should be small, the coverage range at which UEs can meet their QoS constraints should be large. Based on this observation, we propose a novel RRM algorithm designed to strongly lower the HeNBs downlink transmission power. We come out with the design of an RRM algorithm, the Ghost Femtocells (RRM Ghost ), which trades off transmission energy for 286 4.8 4.7 4.6 4.4 4.3 4.2 4.1 3.9 3.8 3.7 3.6 3.4 3.3 3.2 3.1 2.9 2.8 0 25 75 125 Number of VoIP UEs 175 225 Figure 5 Scenario B (mixed traffic):  performance evaluation with EDF, MCI and GAS schedulers with 75 NRTV UEs varying the load of VoIP UEs. frequency resources. The detailed description of the proposed algorithm is as follows: Step 1 (Classification of Interferers): H-UEs overhear the Broadcast CHannel (BCH) and estimate which neighbour HeNBs are currently strong interferers. A interferer is strong, if its sensed power level is larger than a predefined threshold. Step 2 (Feedback to HeNB): H-UE feedbacks to the HeNB its QoS constraints, the momentary Channel State Indicator (CSI) measurements, and the cell-IDs of the HeNBs perceived as strong interferers. Step 3 (Feedback to Control Unit): Each HeNB within the femtocell network (i.e. the group of femtocells placed in a block of apartments) reports this information to the Control Unit (CU). For each user i in the network, the CU stores the set of its neighbours Vi . The elements of this set are the users that are served by the HeNB of user i (HeNBi ) and the users that are served by the HeNBs that are indicated as strong interferers by HeNBi . 287 5.5 Number of Users Figure 6 Scenarios C (mixed traffic):  performance evaluation with EDF, MCI and GAS schedulers with 100 HTTP UEs varying the load of VoIP UEs. Step 4 (Computing Scheduling Matrices): According to the CSI measurements and the selected scheduler algorithm, the CU computes scheduling j metric i for every user i on every RB j . In this paper, the RRMGhost implements a proportional fair based scheduler, that is K  i = SINRi SINRki , (2) k=1 where SINRi represents the instantaneous channel condition of the RB j K k observed at user i and k=1 SINRi is the sum of SINR of K RBs that have been already allotted to user i. RRM Ghost uses this metric to build the Nf Nk NRB ], where scheduling matrices M T x and M Rep of dimension [ k=1 Nf is the number of active HeNBs in the network, Nk is the number of users served by the femtocell k, and NRB is the number of available RBs. Based on M T x , the scheduler allocates to each user the minimum number of RBs that meets QoS and power constraints. Then, the proposed scheduler sorts matrix 288 M Rep to allocate to the served users additional available RBs. Step 5 (Scheduling): The CU selects the minimum number of RBs that meets QoS and power constraints for each user to be served. It schedules in three Step 5-a: The controller selects the best user-available RB pair (i, j ) with the best metric in M T x . Step 5-b: For each user-available RB pair (i, j ), the algorithm checks the set  of RBs allotted to user i (R Bi ) and selects the highest possible Modulation  and Coding Scheme (MCSi ), accordingly. The overall available power at user i served by the HeNB k is Pi = P T /Nk , where P T and Nk are the power budget and the number of users of the HeNB k, respectively. The controller Bi . equally splits Pi in the set R Step 5-c: Then, the controller estimates the sum of the Mutual Information I  i. given by set R Bi and MCS When I = 0, the selected user-RB pair cannot be served in this scheduling period so the values of the i-rows in both M T x and M Rep are set to zero. When I Rtg , user i is served. The values of the i-row in M T x and M Rep (i, j ) are set to zero and the values of the i-row in M Rep are updated according to the scheduler rule (see Eq. (2)). Moreover, M T x (k, j ) and M Rep (k, j ), where k Vi , are set to zero. If I < Rtg , the user i is not served yet. The values M T x (i, j ) and M Rep (i, j ) are set to zero and the values of the i-rows in M Rep and M T x are updated according to the scheduler rule (see Eq. (2)). Moreover, M T x (k, j ) and M Rep (k, j ), where k Vi , are set to zero. Step 6 (MCS Scaling): Given the set of RBs (R Bi ) allocated each served user i, the algorithm finds the MCS of the minimum order that meets the  i , the MCS of user i (MCSi ) is QoS target. If MCS is different from MCS set equal to MCS . The goal of this process is twofold. First, it improves the transmission robustness. Second, it reduces the padding thus improving the spectral efficiency. Step 7 (Spreading): The CU allocates unused RBs to spread the original message and improve 289 the transmission robustness. Scheduling is done in three steps: Step 7-a: The scheduler selects the user-available RB pair (i, j ) that has the best metric in M Rep . Step 7-b: For each user-available RB pair (i, j ), the algorithm checks the Mutual Information I given by the entire set of RBs allocated to user i and MCSi : If I < Rtg , exploit further RBs would cause outage, hence the values of the row corresponding to user I in M Rep are set to zero. When I Rtg , the original message is spread in the additional RB and M Rep (i, j ) as well as M Rep (k, j ), where k Vi , are set to zero. Moreover the values of the i-row in M Rep are updated according to the scheduler rule. Step 7-c: The scheduler process terminates when no more user-RB pairs are available. Step 8 (Power Scaling): The algorithm estimates the SINR perceived at each served user and reduces the allocated transmission power to meet the SINR threshold given by the target PER and the selected MCS. Step 9 (Message Reception): Finally, each user collects the information received in each of its allotted RBs and combines these RBs using the chase combining scheme .

Deployment of Femtocells and System Model In our analisys, we assume that femtocells are deployed according to the 3GPP grid urban deployment model (see Figure 7). This model represents a single floor building with 10 m 10 m apartments placed next to each other in a 5 5 grid. The block of apartments belongs to the same region of a macrocell. Moreover, we assume that six additional M-BSs surround the central macrocell generating additive interference for both macro and femto users. Each HeNB can simultaneously serve up to four users. In order to consider a realistic case in which some apartments do not have femtocells, we use a system parameter d called a deployment ratio that indicates the percentage of apartments with a femtocell. Furthermore, the 3GPP model 290 Figure 7 3GPP femtocell grid urban deployment model. includes a , another parameter called an activation ratio defined as the percentage of active femtocells. If a femtocell is active, it will transmit with a certain power over data channels. Otherwise, it will transmit over the control channel. We use two different models to capture the signal propagation effect based on the 3GPP specifications : 1. Transmissions from femto and macro users to M-BSs: PL(dB) = 15.3 + 37.6 log10 d + Low , where d is the distance between the transmitter and the receiver (in meters) and Low is the penetration losses of an outside wall equal to 20 dB. 2. Transmissions from femto and macro users to HeNBs: PL(dB) = 38.46 + 20 log10 d + 0.7d2D,indoor + 18.3n((n+2)/(n+1)0.46) + q Liw , meters), d2D,indoor is the two dimensional separation between the trans Table 2 Main system model parameters. Carrier bandwidth Total number of Resource Blocks M-BS Tx power M-BS antenna gain after cable loss HeNB maximum Tx power HeNB antenna gain after cable loss Shadowing distribution Shadowing standard deviation in the interfering links Shadowing standard deviation in the femto/macro user useful link Autocorrelation distance of shadowing Fast fading distribution Thermal noise density 291 10.0 MHz 16 dBW 13 dB 17 dBW 0 dB Log-normal 8 dB 4/8 dB 50 m Rayleigh N0 = 174 dBm/Hz mitter and the receiver (in meters), n is the number of penetrated floors, q is the number of walls that separate the user apartments and the transmitting HeNB apartment, Liw is the penetration loss of walls within the grid of apartments equal to 5 dB. The third term in the above expression represents the penetration loss due to walls inside an apartment. This attenuation is modeled as a log-linear value equal to 0.7 dB/m. The fourth term represents the penetration loss within different floors. In the single floor building scenario considered, we have d = d2D,indoor and n = 0. Table 2 shows key model parameters including shadowing, fast fading, the macrocell antenna gain, and the transmission power.

Simulation Results In this section, we assess the effectiveness of the proposed RRM Ghost by comparing its performance with a reference algorithm (RRMclassic). The main differences between these schemes are: 1. In RRM classic, there is no coordination within the femtocell network. Hence, HeNBs are not aware of the presence and allocation strategy of neighbour HeNBs. 2. RRM classic aims to maximize the spectral efficiency of femtocells while minimizing the probability that users that belong to different cells access 292 to same RBs. Thus, the RRM classic attempts to limit the number of RBs allotted to each H-UE. 3. RRM classic algorithm does not implement MCS and Power scaling (Steps 6 and 8 in RRM Ghost algorithm). We present simulation results for the system model and its parameters presented in Section 7.1. RRM algorithms are compared in terms of the efficiency metric defined in Section 6.1, Eq. (1). The results are averaged over 100 independent runs. For each run 103 independent TTIs are simulated and at each TTI channel fading instances are updated. At the beginning of each run, we randomly place two blocks of apartments where HeNBs, H-UEs, and M-UEs are randomly deployed. Note that in the presented simulations, we consider that all deployed HeNBs are active (a = 1) with four H-UEs per HeNB. Moreover, indoor M-UEs are randomly distributed in the apartments where HeNBs are not deployed. In our simulations, solid and dashed lines, respectively, correspond to the performance of RRM classic and RRM Ghost schemes. Figure 8 shows the H-UEs performance as  versus the power budget P T at each femtocell. We have set d equal to 0.3 and considered four different traffic scenarios: Scenario Traf.1: H-UE throughput target Ttg = 300 kbit/s, square marked curves. Scenario Traf.2: H-UE throughput target Ttg = 600 kbit/s, circle marked Scenario Traf.3: H-UE throughput target Ttg = 1 Mbit/s, star marked curves. Scenario Traf.4: H-UE throughput target Ttg = 2 Mbit/s, diamond marked From Figure 8 we can observe that the proposed RRM Ghost improve the performance of H-UEs compared to RRM classic in all considered traffic scenarios. For instance, considering a HeNB power budget equal to 10 mW, the proposed RRM Ghost gain up to 94.5% with respect to RRM classic in Scenario Traf.1, up to 90% in Scenario Traf.2, up to 85% in Scenario Traf.3, and up to 75.4% in Scenario Traf.4. Moreover, results outline how the gain increases in lightly loaded scenarios (Scenario Traf.1 and Scenario Traf.2) where our 18 293 RRMclassicSc. Traf1 RRM Sc. Traf Sc.Traf classic 16 RRMclassicSc. Traf4 14 RRMGhostSc. Traf1 RRMGhostSc. Traf2 [mW/Mbit/s] Ghost RRMGhostSc. Traf4 10 8 6 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 20 Power budget at each HeNB [mW] Figure 8 Average  measured at H-UEs as function of power budget at each HeNB in different traffic scenarios. algorithms permit to strongly reduce the transmission power by improving the femtocell energy efficiency. In this cases, our schemes takes advantage of the lower throughput targets to decrease the downlink transmission power and spreading over RBs. Figures 9 and 10 show the improvement in M-UE performance under RRMGhost . In the co-channel femtocell deployment, indoor M-UE performance is limited by femto-to-macro interference. Some recent research introduced cooperation within M-BSs and HeNBs in order to coordinate the access to the radio medium and avoid the cross-tier interference [39, 40]. However, following the 3GPP Release 10 , we do not implement this coordination in our system. Hence, the M-BS scheduler is not aware of the RBs exploited by the interfering HeNBs. When the M-BS assigns an RB to an indoor user which is used by a neighbour HeNB, this M-UE can be exposed to a high level 294 of interference. We aim to evaluate the effect of this interference on M-UE when femtocells use the reference RRM classic and the proposed scheme. In order to compare these algorithms, we have set the M-UE throughput target equal to 300 kbit/s, the H-UE throughput target equal to 600 kbit/s and considered three different femtocell deployment scenarios: Scenario L : low density d = 0.3, circle-marked curves. Scenario M : medium density d = 0.5, triangle-marked curves. Scenario H : high density d = 0.8, plus-marked curves. In Figure 9 we show the indoor M-UE performance as  versus the power budget P T at each femtocell. Results indicate that RRMGhost permit to limit the impact of the femto-to-macro interference in all scenarios. For instance, considering P T equal to 20 mW (20 mW is often indicated by researchers and industries as the current downlink power target for HeNBs), the proposed RRMGhost gains up to 10.6, 16.2, and 21.5% with respect to RRMclassic in Scenarios L , M , and H . In low/medium density scenarios, the probability that neighbour HeNBs allocate the same RBs at the same time is fairly small under RRMclassic. Hence, RRMGhost improvements mainly come from steps 6, 7, and 8 of the proposed schemes (MCS scaling, spreading, and power scaling) that permit to reduce the HeNB downlink power transmission in each RB. However, in Scenario H , several neighbour HeNBs may access same RBs in the same TTI resulting in high peak of interference on some RBs. In RRMGhost , the CU coordinate the access of neighbouring femtocells to further limit the overall interference perceived at end-users of both macro and femto cells. Figure 10 shows the M-UE performance as a function of distance between the end-user and the M-BS for different femtocell deployment scenarios and for P T equal to 20 mW. M-UEs that are located far away from the M-BS perceive low average SINR due to path loss and interference generated by surrounding M-BSs. Hence, it is fundamental to limit the femto-to-macro interference to satisfy these macro users QoS constraints. Simulation results show that the proposed algorithm strongly enhance the performance of MUEs placed at the border of the cell. Furthermore, the observed gain increases with higher density of femtocells and larger distance between the M-UE and its M-BS. 295 RRMclassicSc.H Sc. M RRMGhostSc.H RRMclassicSc.L [mW/Kbit/s] RRMGhostSc.L Figure 9 Average  measured at M-UEs as a function of the power budget at each HeNB in different traffic scenarios. In Scenario L , under RRMclassic, the M-BS needs 5.8 mW/Kbit/s to serve a M-UE placed at 225 meters far away, while only 4.6 mW/Kbit/s are necessary with the proposed RRM Ghost . In Scenario M , under RRMclassic, the M-BS needs 7.7 mW/Kbit/s to serve a M-UE placed at 225 meters far away, while only 5.5 mW/Kbit/s are necessary with the proposed RRM Ghost . In Scenario H , under RRM classic, the M-BS needs 10.9 mW/Kbit/s to serve a M-UE placed at 225 meters far away, while only 7.1 mW/Kbit/s are necessary with the proposed RRM Ghost . This improvements result in higher macrocell coverage and capacity. The maximum number of indoor M-UEs placed at the border of the cell that can be served simultaneously is NMU E = T PMBS  TtgMU E , (3) 296 RRMclassicSc.M RRMGhostSc.M L 45 105 135 165 195 Distance between MBS and MUE [m] Figure 10 Average  measured at M-UEs as a function of the distance between the end-user and the M-BS. Table 3 Maximum number of indoor M-UEs placed at the border of the macrocell that can be contemporary served by an M-BS. d \ RRM algorithm RRMclassic RRMGhost 0.3 21 0.5 0.8 where PMBS and TtgMU E are respectively the M-BS downlink available power and the M-UE throughput target. Table 3 shows the values of NMU E under the discussed algorithms and in different deployment scenarios (PMBS MU E and Ttg are set equal to 16 dBW and 300 Kbit/s, respectively).

Conclusion Communication Energy Efficiency (EE) presents indeed an alarming bottleneck in the telecommunication growth paradigm. In this paper, we first detailed the holistic energy efficient optimization methodology for broadband cellular networks proposed by the EARTH project. We discussed the new research activities that are currently investigated in the vivid area of Green Communications. The topics of energy efficiency metrics, network deployment strategies, network management, and energy efficient radio resource management have been introduced. Then, we investigated downlink power effectiveness of two reference scheduling algorithms MCI and EDF, in a systems that implements a realistic OFDMA air interface where no full-queued traffic and unlimited number of control channel per TTI is assumed. We underlined that while EDF does not profit from multi-user diversity, MCI targets at maximizing the cell throughput regardless of the users QoS constraints even in low load scenarios for which spectral efficiency can be traded with energy efficiency. Then, we came up with the definition of a novel scheduler, the GAS algorithm. We evaluated the effectiveness of the proposed GAS algorithm comparing it with the above reference schedulers. Our simulations substantiated how GAS is a highly flexible and effective scheduler for a variety of traffic scenarios and it drives to notable energy cost reductions while meeting the Quality of Service (QoS) of UEs active admitted in the system. In the third part of the paper, we presented the RRM Ghost , a novel radio resource management scheme that efficiently uses the available wireless spectrum in a two-tier network. In this scenario, a large population of heterogeneous interferers shares the overall cellular bandwidth. The proposed algorithm limits the undesired effects of interference and allows a drastic reduction of the downlink energy per information bit required to satisfy the QoS constraints of both macro and femto users. We expect that both the holistic system methodology and the proposed energy efficient resource allocation algorithms presented in this paper will encourage the research community to investigate into innovative solutions in order to achieve a sustainable increase of broadband communication system.
