Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 184 (2023) 113482 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews journal homepage: www..com/locate/rser Review article ICT sector, digitization and environmental sustainability: A systematic review of the literature from 2000 to 2022 Lanouar Charfeddine a ,, Mohamed Umlai b a b Center for Entrepreneurship and Organizational Excellence, College of Business and Economics, Qatar University, P.O. Box 2713, Doha, Qatar Department of Finance and Economics, college of Business and Economics, Qatar University, P.O.Box 2713, Doha, Qatar ARTICLE INFO JEL classification: O33 Q52 Keywords: Systematic review Environmental sustainability ICT Digitization ABSTRACT In line with an intensified call for reducing greenhouse emissions and curbing the effects of climate change, scientists and experts have looked to information communication technology (ICT) and digitization as critical tools for the more efficient use and production of energy. Consequently, research on ICT/digitization and their impact on environmental sustainability has witnessed exponential growth in the last few decades. This study provides a systematic review of the relationship between ICT/digitization and environmental sustainability over the period from January 2000 to April 2022. It aimed to improve our understanding of the different theories and channels governing the ICT/digitizationenvironmental sustainability nexus, to provide an indepth analysis and discussion of the trends and main empirical findings of the reviewed articles, and to highlight key avenues for future research. In total, 166 scientific articles examining 297 associations between ICT/digitization and environmental sustainability were selected for this review. The results revealed that most of the studies have used measures based on climate change and air pollution for environmental sustainability, and traditional ICT/digitization measures, e.g., mobile phone subscriptions and internet users. The results also showed that although most studies found evidence for ICT/digitization improving environmental sustainability, evidence for a negative association is concentrated in studies on the Group of countries. The results also revealed a scarcity of studies investigating nonlinear relationships between ICT/digitization and environmental sustainability. 1. Introduction Over the past 50 years, climate change has led to an upsurge in the occurrence and severity of extreme weather events around the globe. An almost five-fold increase in the occurrence of extreme weather-related natural disasters was recorded in the 20102019 period compared with 19701979 . Disturbingly, these disasters have killed 115 people1 and caused USD 202 million in damage per day since 1970 . According to the latest estimates, without major intervention to reduce emissions, the global temperature is set to rise by 2.5 C to 4.5 C by 2100 . The issue of climate change is so severe that for ocean temperatures and sea levels to return to the levels of the pre-Industrial era, it would take approximately 1000 years; in the miraculous event that carbon emissions ceased completely . Most prior studies have attributed global climate change and the consequent meteorological instability to unsustainable practices of energy consumption . Energy consumption is inextricably linked to the intensification of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (including carbon dioxide (CO2 ) emissions and other pollutants), which has urged governments and international environmental and energy agencies to explore policies that can help slow down and perhaps reverse the processes of global climate change by reducing emissions and promoting environmental sustainability initiatives . Ensuring that all countries adhere to policies on green trade, resource usage and energy conservation, as well as other environmental sustainability proposals highlighted at international climate change conferences, for instance, is not a simple task. Reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change have stressed that in order to limit global warming to 1.5 C by 2030, CO2 would need to match the reductions witnessed in the first half of 2020 when the COVID-19 lock-downs in most countries worldwide caused the demands of the transportation and energy sectors to fall dramatically . The solutions proposed to tackle GHG emissions center around a cleaner and more efficient generation and use of energy [68]. Literature on nuclear power, capture and storage of CO2 , and renewable Corresponding author. E-mail address: lcharfeddine@qu.edu.qa (L. Charfeddine). 1 Of all extreme weather-related deaths, 91 percent transpired in economies classed as developing by the UN. World Bank country classification paint a similar picture, wherein 82 percent of fatalities took place in countries considered to be low (and lower-middle) income . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2023.113482 Received 30 January 2023; Received in revised form 17 June 2023; Accepted 19 June 2023 Available online 14 July 2023 1364-0321/ 2023 The Author(s). Published by Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). L. Charfeddine and M. Umlai ABDC APPE AQAH BSAE CITI ECOL ED(s) EKC ENDS Nomenclature 2SLS AMG CCEMG CCR CDMG D-SDM DFE DHC DKR DLT DOLS DQECM DSUR ECM FGLS FMOLS GC GLS GM-FMOLS GMM GNS GWR IoT IPCC ISUR LMDI LSDV MG NASA NOAA NPRP OLS PCA PGC PLS-SEM PMG PSCE PVAR QARDL QRPD RLS SDM SEM STIRPAT SYS-GMM TYC UECM VAR VECM Two-stage least squares Augmented mean group Common correlated effects mean group Canonical cointegrating regression Cross-sectionally demeaned mean group Dynamic spatial Durbin model Dynamic fixed effect DumitrescuHurlin causality DriscollKraay regression Digital ledger technology Dynamic ordinary least squares Dynamic quantile error correction model Dynamic seemingly unrelated regression Error correction method Feasible generalized least squares Fully Modified OLS Granger causality Generalized least-square method Group mean-fully modified ordinary least squares Generalized method of moments general nesting spatial model Geographically weighted regression Internet of Things Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Iterated seemingly unrelated regressions estimator Logarithmic average decomposition method Least squares dummy variable estimator Mean group National Aeronautics and Space Administration National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration National Priorities Research Program Ordinary least squares Principal component analysis Pairwise Granger causality Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling Pooled mean group Panel-corrected standard errors Panel vector autoregressive Quantile autoregressive distributed lag Panel data quantile regression Robust Least Square Spatial Durbin model Spatial error model Stochastic impacts by regression on population, Affluence, and Technology System-generalized method of moment Toda and Yamamoto causality Unrestricted error correction model Vector autoregressive Vector error correction model ENER EPOL ERKI ESPR EU FRST HELI IETS IJSD INSF ITS IUCN JEPM JIF JOCP JOEM NBER QANQ RENE REPO RSER SAARC SCTE SJR SPCO SSA SUS TECS TELI TFSC UK UNWCED UPOL US WMO Australian Business Deans Council Applied Energy Air Quality, Atmosphere and Health Business Strategy and the Environment Cities Ecological Economics Electronic Database(s) Environmental Kuznets Curve Environment, Development and Sustainability Energy Economics Energy Policy Economic Research-Ekonomska Istrazivanja Environmental Science and Pollution Research European Union Foresight Heliyon IET Intelligent Transport Systems International Journal of Sustainable Development and World Ecology Information Systems Frontiers Intelligent Transportation Systems International Union for Conservation of Nature Journal of Environmental Planning and Management Journal Impact Factor Journal of Cleaner Production Journal of Environmental Management National Bureau of Economic Research Quality and Quantity Renewable Energy Resources Policy South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Science of the Total Environment Scimago Journal Rank Sustainable Production and Consumption Sub-Saharan Africa Sustainable Development Technology in Society Telematics and Informatics Technological Forecasting and Social United Kingdom United Nations World Commission on Environment and Development Utilities Policy United States World Meteorological Organization energy technologies, for instance, is abundant. Recently, information communication technology (ICT) has emerged as an essential but problematic contender in the push towards environmental sustainability. Although some have credited ICT with reducing CO2 emissions through systems that allow greater efficiency and productivity, others have associated ICT and its high penetration with increased energy consumption 2 and pollution . Further complicating the issue is the fact that both negative and positive impacts of ICT have been revealed in countries across the economic development [1012]. According to the literature, ICT clearly has the potential to positively contribute to sustainable development. This is evident in the use of smart grids for the generation and consumption of energy , the use of the Internet of Things (IoT) to complement green manufacturing and construction [14,15], the use of big data analytics for intelligent transportation systems [16,17], the use of networks and sensors in rural agriculture [18,19], and the dominance of e-commerce and supply chains with enhanced efficiency [8,20], among others. However, estimating and quantifying the environmental impact of ICT remains a challenging but interesting topic for policymakers and environmental institutions . However and despite its important implications, only few studies have attempted to evaluate the exact carbon footprint impact of the ICT sector [2123]. According to some studies, between 2002 and 2012, the carbon footprint of ICT has grown by 40%, and its total contribution ranges approximately between 1.8% and 2.8% in the global GHG emissions. Belkhir and Elmeligi estimates range between 1.9% and 2.3%, and between 1.8% and 2.8% for . Despite these attempts to quantify the impact of ICT on GHG emissions, the results are very mixed and divergent between studies, which is due to the type of ICT components considered, the period investigated, and the method employed to quantify the impact. What is clear is that this research question remains of particular interest for researchers, policymakers and environmental institutions. Empirically, ICT has been shown to improve environmental quality via its mitigation of CO2 emissions . In some cases, a 1% increase in wireless/mobile ICTs has been shown to promote the use of renewable technologies by 0.2% and 1.1%in the long and short terms, respectively . However, ICTs potential is marred by concerns regarding its contribution to GHG emissions and overall environmental degradation due to the lifecycles of ICT [27,28]. Emissions are released during the extraction of the raw materials required to produce ICT, thein manufacturing process itself and in the transportation of the goods to businesses and end-users. There are also operational emissions from the ICT sector included in the energy consumed by everyday use (e.g., data centers) as well as the maintenance involved, including the end-of-life emissions involved in the disposal of ICT and other electronic (e-waste). These first-order (direct) and second-order (indirect) effects of ICT are all matters of concern for researchers looking at ICT as a solution to boost environmental sustainability . The enhanced efficiency and accessibility of ICT also entail a rise in emissions from higher usage by businesses and individuals, constituting third-order (long-term or systematic) effects . Statistically, ICTrelated emissions are estimated to represent 2% of global emissions, similar to emissions from the global aviation sector . A prime illustration of the problem can be seen with the recent innovations in digital ledger technology, blockchain and cryptocurrencies. Although the are expected to bring untold changes to the global economy and life in general, the energy demands of these new ICTs have reawakened concerns about environmental degradation. For instance, the mining of (bitcoin) cryptocurrency expends approximately 91 terawatt-hours of electricity per year, which exceeds consumption by the entirety of Finland, a nation of about 5.5 million people . The lack of consensus on the overall impact of ICT, within the field of research into environmental sustainability means that the findings cannot be generalized . Even the conceptual literature is cognizant of the paradox that ICT/digitization presents. On the one hand, ICT/digitization is believed to foster resource efficiency. On the other, it may also create environmentally damaging consumption/side effects. What is certain however, is that if ICT/digitization is unchecked, the information society carried by this technology may be less sustainable than the industrial society . Furthermore, one can notice misalignment between policy recommendations, with some empirical studies encouraging heavier investment in ICT [32,33] and others emphasizing stricter control and regulation [3436]. Filtering through these opposing perspectives leads us to a question. In which contexts has ICT contributed to environmental sustainability versus environmental degradation? What impact does ICT have in the short- versus long term? How can governments and policymakers alleviate the negative impacts of ICT while promoting greater use and accessibility? To address these questions, we conduct a systematic literature review was conducted. Simultaneously, this study contributes to the literature by examining the measures used to operationalize ICT and environmental sustainability, and provides researchers with suggestions for(and an analysis of) more sophisticated measures that can be incorporated in future studies. As is customary, future avenues for research in the field and relatively new offshoots of the literature on the sustainability of ICT have also been identified. The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the nexus between ICT and environmental sustainability by discussing the definitions of these terms and the theoretical linkages between them. Section 3 describes the systematic approach and criteria used to identify the articles to review. Section 4 presents and discusses the findings from a review of selected articles, elaborating on their empirical results, measures and econometric methods. Section 5 collates and analyzes the important policy recommendations from the reviewed papers, while Section 6 discusses future research avenues and proposes indicators that can benefit future ICT and environmental sustainability studies. Lastly, Section 7 concludes the study . 2. The nexus between ICT and environmental sustainability As will be delineated in this review, several empirical studies have attempted to explore how ICT impacts environmental sustainability. What is starkly apparent however, is how little attention has been paid to the theoretical foundation that explain the nexus between ICT and environmental sustainability. To bridge this gap, three ideas that are very relevant to this discussion are presented.2 To increase effectiveness in this regard, it is critical to begin with a discussion about the definition of environmental sustainability and ICT/digitization. 2.1. Definitions of environmental sustainability and ICT/digitization 2.1.1. Environmental sustainability Although there is no universally accepted definition of environmental sustainability itself, governments, industry, non-profit organizations, and environmental agencies have all attempted to define a term that can allow them to then develop relevant approaches to attaining it. According to a 1987 report by the United Nations World Commission on Environment and Development , environmental sustainability is concerned with behavior that can aid in the preservation of natural resources to allow future generations an equal, if not better, way of life as current generations . Daly , among the earliest pioneers of ecological sustainability, examined the quandary from the perspective of maintaining natural capital, proposing that the definition of environmental sustainability needed to encompass three main themes. Firstly, the rate at which renewable resources are harvested must not exceed the rate at which the resources are regenerated (i.e., sustainable yield). Secondly, there must be a comparable development of renewable substitutes for a non-renewable resources that are being depleted. Thirdly, the rate at which waste/pollution is generated by projects must not exceed the absorptive capacity of the surrounding environment (i.e., sustainable waste disposal). At its core, environmental sustainability can therefore be defined as the maintenance of natural capital . This central concept of 3 Other theories can be found in the articles Supplementary Material In the literature, digitization and its related forms are recognized as having numerous benefits for countries. These benefits may be assessed in terms of six qualities or attributes according to Sabbagh et al. . Such attributes include ubiquity, affordability, dependability, speed, usability and skills. What is important to note, however, is that digitization is not the end aim in and of itself, but is instead considered as a steppingstone on the way to a more comprehensive digital transformation of human life in the future. For that matter, assessing how ICT, digitization and/or digitalization affect our lives and the environment around us is of special interest to researchers and stakeholders alike. In the 2003 World Summit on Information Society held in Switzerland, a consortium of countries, regions and international organizations was asked to develop tools as basic ICT indicators to measure and monitor progress towards an information society. The main objectives were to (1) ratify a set of core ICT indicators that could be compared internationally, (2) participate in building of developing economies statistical capacity, and (3) to initiate a worldwide database to host data on the core ICT indicators established . The consortium ratified ICT indicators for households and the business sector for geographical regions such as Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, Asia-Pacific, Latin America and the Caribbean. Many of these ICT indicators include of conventional end-user technologies such as landlines and cellular telephones, internet access and fixed broadband . preserving natural resources or natural capital of is found in the extant literature, connecting environmental sustainability to the three main sub-dimensions related to air, land and water. Definitions have expanded over the years to include perspectives on human needs such as well-being, clean air and water, as well as the non-economic variables, environmental education and the protection of ecological beauty. Environmental sustainability, despite having some association in terms of its benefit to human life, largely differs from other forms of sustainability such as social and economic sustainability. Goodland stated that source and sink functions are two fundamental environmental services that need to be maintained for the duration that sustainability is required. The former service relates to use of renewable and non-renewable resources, whereas the latter relates to the assimilation of pollution and waste . In order to ensure that the goals of environmental sustainability are reached and/or sustained, the broader natural resources topics pertaining to air, land and water pollution are divided into sub-categories to facilitate measurement and monitoring. For instance, international institutions such as the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) have issued (and continue to enhance) frameworks that nations worldwide can use to design their own environmental policies and strategies to help minimize unbridled energy use and achieve or maintain environmental sustainability. In their 2011 framework, 11 categories were suggested by the UNFCCC along with sub-categories that can be further expounded upon by researchers. Specifically, these sub-categories consist of land use, water, energy, air, biodiversity, natural resource use, waste, forests, climate and soil, as well as, financial and monetary instruments (i.e., those that can be levied in the form of environmental taxes or penalties) . 2.2. Theories on the ICT/digitizationenvironmental sustainability nexus theories This section aims to provide an exhaustive review of the different theories that can be used to explain the ICT/digitizationenvironmental sustainability nexus. In particular, we will stress on how hardware, ICT infrastructure, and software products have contributed to improve (degrade) the quality of environment through for example generating (reducing) large quantities of GHG emissions. The three theories discussed below highlight the important role of the ICT product lifecycle, ICT value chain (regional distribution of the environmental effects), and the use of smart devices. For instance, the production, use, and disposal of hardware devices (computers, servers, and networking equipment) contribute significantly to GHG emissions. It is well acknowledge that the production process of these hardware devices is a high energyintensive process that requires high carbon footprints raw materials extraction. Similarly, the ICT infrastructure supporting the functioning of ICT systems (data centers, telecommunications networks, and data transmission equipment) requires constant power supply and cooling systems that are intensive in terms of energy consumption. Third, the software products indirectly impact the quality of the environment through their development, distribution, and usage. All these channels describe how ICT/digitization components can positively or negatively impact the quality of the environment. 2.1.2. ICT/digitization Much like environmental sustainability, there is a lack of consensus among researchers and international institutions on how best to define ICT . Although ICT has been conceptualized and defined in various ways in the literature, it is generally understood to be an umbrella term that encompasses many forms of communication devices, hardware and analog transmissions. This includes personal computers, their network infrastructure, radio transmissions, television, cell phones, satellite systems and so on. As a concept, ICT is very broad and is continually evolving. One of the broadest definitions of ICT includes systems that are fundamentally involved in the generation, processing, storage, communication, and/or presentation of digital information [41, p.687]. Essentially, any device that has the ability to retrieve, manipulate, store, transmit, or receive information in digital form can be considered a form of ICT. Among these forms of ICT are digitization and digitalization. As is the case for ICT itself, there is also disagreement on universal definitions of the two terms and how synonymous with ICT they are is also debated within the literature. De Clerck for instance, connected the notion of digitization to automation, emphasizing that converting physical data to a digital form is carried out to automate processes and workflows. However, digitalization is considered a broadening of the scope of digitization by including the transformation of processes. In this way, digitalization may be viewed as a bridge towards a completely digital firm, organization or way of life by improving the existing processes by using digitalized data and cutting-edge technology. Cenamor et al. defined digitalization as the application of ICT technologies that permit the rapid coding, storing, formalizing and distribution of large quantities of information. To illustrate these two concepts, consider the case of a library. Digitization here can be the conversion of the customers records in analog form (e.g., cards) into digital customer data. This conversion may be performed to streamline the librarys lending processes, for example . 2.2.1. First-, second- and third-order effects A vital contribution to the discussion on the ICTenvironmental sustainability nexus is that of who highlighted the broad positive, and negative effects of ICT. These effects were classified as first-, secondand third-order effects. First-order effects, also known as primary or direct effects, represent impacts that stem from the production, use, recycling, and disposal of ICT products, or what is commonly referred to as the ICT lifecycle. First-order effects are theorized to worsen environmental quality because of the energy expended in the production and use of ICT, as well as the ecological damage caused by the inadequate disposal of e-waste . Empirical research on the first-order effects usually linked specific aspects of the ICT lifecycle to the emission of GHG such as CO2 , electricity usage and/or other energy usage metrics. First-order effects are frequently found to have a positive association with environmental degradation . A simple example of this can be the energy consumed by hardware of intelligent 4 transport systems (ITS). In fact any and all electronic devices, such as smartphones, tablets, laptops, and desktop computers, are examples of first-order effects in relation to environmental degradation. The production, use, and disposal of these devices contribute to the generation of e-waste and the consumption of non-renewable resources. Moreover, the data centers and server farms used to store and process digital information are also examples of first-order effects related to the GHG emissions associated with their operation. Software is not without its problems either, as the use of cloud computing services, such as email, storage and software as a service, also contribute to first-order effects. The energy consumption and GHG emissions associated with data centers that support these services can contribute to climate change. Video streaming, online gaming, and virtual and augmented reality, are also examples of energy-intensive software applications that can contribute to environmental degradation in this regard. Second-order effects, also known as secondary or indirect effects involve the impact ICT has on the environment resulting from its ability to transform processes. Second-order effects are commonly considered to have a negative association with environmental degradation by reducing carbon footprints/pollution . Following on from the previous example, this would represent the energy saved from using ITS applications. Third-order effects include the rebound effects (sometimes also referred as Jevons paradox) that occur when the increase in the efficiency of how a resource is used increases the total use instead of decreasing it . Third-order effects are theorized to stem from the benefits achieved by the second-order effects. For instance, an increased demand in the transportation sector may occur because of the gains towards energy efficiency via the use of ITS applications. Decisions about the development, deployment and use of ICT solutions must therefore consider their potential first-, second-, and thirdorder effects. Doing so can enable ICT hardware and software manufacturers to mitigate the potential negative impacts on the environment and promote more sustainable practices in the ICT sector. As public demand for renewable energy resources has developed , so too have policies for sustainable ICT. More credence has been given to concepts such as greening ICT and greening through ICT. The former is concerned with reducing the energy consumption levels of ICT equipment, whereas the latter is achieved via automated lower-power options for idle times, for instance. More sustainable ICT reduces the first-order effects and contributes to reducing energy consumption at a societal level as well, leading to second-order effects. However, according to Hilty et al. , the positive and negative effects of ICT cancel each other out. Lennerfors et al. , on the other hand emphasizes that these impacts should be weighed differently when the geographical locations are considered. Although eWST elaborates on the first- and second-order effects, the rebound effects are left somewhat unaddressed by their framework. Moreover, ICT has been able to profoundly change the way in which people communicate, affecting social systems at various levels, from firms to the global society. Finding models of ICT governance or theoretical frameworks that properly utilize ICTs potential for sustainable solutions and neutralize ICTs potential for harm in poorer countries is therefore crucial . 2.2.3. Examples of the coalescence of ICT and environmental sustainability Several smart initiatives have emerged as a result of the intersection between technology and environmental sustainability. Some of the most evident practices include the technology used in collecting data on habitats/wildlife, energy use and agriculture. According to Bakker and Ritts , massive amounts of environmental data can be collected from satellites and sensors positioned in aerial, oceanic and terrestrial locations. Such sensors are increasingly wearable, tracking human, animal and insect activity on a continuous basis . Meanwhile, urban and rural households all over the world have witnessed the diffusion of smart electricity and water meters, with some estimates showing 187% growth in installations from 23.5 million in 2010 to 729 million in 2019 . In agriculture, technology has been used to support subsistence farmers and their wider communities by developing more resilient and sustainable food production systems that can simultaneously reduce emissions and mitigate the effects of climate change . 2.2.2. Ecological world systems theory Another relevant theory, and similar to the work of Hilty et al. is the Ecological World Systems Theory (eWST). Lennerfors et al. developed the idea of eWST using inspiration from prior works by Hopkins and Wallerstein and Hornborg . Combining the categories of the effects of ICT fromcategorizing concepts seen in Hilty et al. (i.e., first-, second- and third-order effects), eWST is mainly concerned with addressing the unequal distribution of environmental degradation caused by ICT and/or technological developments, and provides a framework to this effect. In terms of practical implications, their framework is beneficial for assessing the impact of ICT on the environment in the form of a life-cycle analysis . According to these authors, eWST should also consider how the environmental effects of ICT are regionally distributed across what is termed core (developed regions), semi-periphery (emerging regions) and periphery (less developed regions). Among the main arguments of eWST is that since core countries have been historically and still are dependent on exploiting the natural resources of peripheral countries, the latter bear the brunt of the environmental and social consequences . Use of the eWST framework is best illustrated by an examination of the ICT value chain in terms of the extraction of raw materials, manufacturing, use, refurbishment reuse and disposal. Across these stages, the problem of the unequal distribution of environmental effects readily exhibited. For instance, rare earth elements, necessary to produce ICT components are extracted from peripheral regions or countries . Mining rare earth elements entails the use of explosives and large quantities of water for filtration, and the production of large amounts of toxic waste that harms the surrounding ecosystem. Energy saved in the core is offset by environmental degradation in the peripheral regions . 3. Review methodology This section presents our search strategy, the inclusion/exclusion criteria and a descriptive analysis of the shortlisted and approved articles. This systematic literature review was based on the approach popularized by Tranfield et al. , which allows research to be conducted in a less biased manner, is more comprehensive and offers improved transparency [59,60]. The review consisted of five successive phases: (1) formulating questions and identifying keywords, (2) locating relevant studies, (3) selecting the studies and evaluating them, (4) analyzing and synthesizing their content, and (5) reporting the results of the review . 3.1. Search strategy and criteria To collate publications that were relevant to the research questions posed by our study, the authors began by identifying the keywords and search terms from a preliminary review of literature on the nexus between ICT (including its other known forms) and environmental sustainability. Journal of Economic Literature (JEL) classifications (i.e., Q5 environmental economics and its sub-classifications) were also referred to for complementing the process of identifying the keyword and search terms . To gauge their efficacy, test searches were then performed using several terms such as environmental pollution and triple bottom line, among others. However, the articles retrieved in these trials yielded duplicated and/or irrelevant literature on social and economic sustainability. Thus, searches were specified using the search 5 Table 1 Inclusion and exclusion criteria. Criterion Inclusion Exclusion Article type Journal article, early-cite articles, pre-prints Conference proceedings, books, book chapters, reports, Language English Non-English language literature Publication year Articles published between (and including) Q1 of 2000 (and not including) Q2 of 2022 Before Q1-2000 Topic Studies both environmental sustainability and ICT Studies only one of these aspects, Journal Quality (Screening A) Indexed in SCOPUS, or has an ABDC ranking of B/above All articles that do not meet journal quality inclusion criteria Note: ABDC = Australian Business Deans Council. terms listed below and their combinations.3 Doing so allowed a more specific search focus and systematically excluded articles that made no reference to these terms and/or demonstrated no relationship between environmental sustainability and ICT/digitization/digitalization: (a) environment* sustainab* (e.g., environmental sustainability, environmentally sustainable) (b) CO2 emission or carbon dioxide emission (c) digitali* (e.g., digitali[z/s]ation, digitali[z/s]ed) (d) digiti* (digiti[z/s]ation, ditigit[z/s]ed) (e) ICT or information communications technology The next phase of the review involved locating articles via the search terms in five electronic databases (EDs) namely (sciencedirect.com), Emerald (emeraldinsight.com), (link.com), Taylor and Francis (tandfonline.com) and Wiley (onlinelibrary.wiley.com). To include the most relevant articles and cover a sizeable time period, the review focused on publications from the last two decades (on or after the year 2000). The main justification for this was that the topic of ICT/digitization has only emerged in the last 30 years while global data for most ICT proxies/measures (published by databases such as the World Bank) are negligible prior to 2000 (and in some cases even prior to 2005) which means that most empirical studies investigating our relationship of interest will be recent. Conceptual or theoretical papers4 were included on the condition that they offered insights about the ICT-environmental sustainability relationship. Meanwhile, conference proceedings, discussion papers, books and book chapters, as well as other non-peer-reviewed publications, introductions to special issues and previously published systematic literature reviews were excluded. Table 1 outlines the inclusion and exclusion criteria used to conduct our search. Screening A led to the exclusion of 6,935 articles that did not meet the journal quality criteria for inclusion. After excluding an additional 10,818 unrelated articles in Screening B, a reduced sample of 1,064 remained for Screening C. This stage eliminated a further 671 articles that lacked the necessary environmental sustainability and ICT/digitization variables in their empirical models or from their discussion if the articles were conceptual. Further removal of articles duplicated between search terms within the same database resulted in a final sample of 166 articles. Fig. 1 illustrates the review process in its entirety as well as the number and details of articles retrieved, included, and excluded at each stage of the review. Table 2 summarizes the results at the stages of screening A, B and C5 . The majority of articles in our final sample hailed from /Science Direct (approximately 44.6% or 74 articles) followed closely by (42.2% or 70 articles) . Only a few relevant articles from Taylor & Francis, Emerald and Wiley survived the screening process, with a combined total of 13.3% of the final sample. Despite the initial quantity of /Science Direct articles remaining after Screening A, a greater number of relevant articles identified for review were published by . Fig. 2 illustrates the distribution of the retrieved articles by journal and year.6 The bar chart graphically displays the trend of publications on the impact of ICT/digitization on environmental sustainability/degradation from 2000 to Q1 of 2022, providing some interesting insights about the trajectory along which research on the topic is expanding. For instance, the number of articles published in 2021 (53 or 31.9%) surpassed that of all previous sample years (2000 2020) combined (52 articles or 31.3%). Moreover, 61 publications (representing 36.7%) in the sample were from Q1 of 2022 alone, which was higher than the number for any year individually, and at this rate, is more than likely to surpass the number for all previous years combined by the years end. 3.2. Analysis of the search findings 3.2.1. Publication outlets Our final sample consisted of 166 publications dispersed across 58 journals7 ; with 29 journals from, /Science Direct, 11 from , 9 from Taylor & Francis, 6 from Emerald and 3 from Wiley. This section provides some analyses based on the inclusion/exclusion criteria of journal ranking. Up to 27.7% of the articles (46) from the sample were published in 15 outlets considered to be top-ranking journals by Australian Business Deans Council, with rankings of A and A*. Another 3.6% (6) of articles were from 5 journals ranked B, while 11.4% (19) were from 8 C-ranked The following section provides a descriptive analysis of the search results, the articles characteristics, the journal rankings and ED searches. The search strategy yielded an initial sample of 17,753 peerreviewed articles that were then screened in various stages of the selection and evaluation phase of our systematic review, as laid out in our inclusion and exclusion criteria (see Table 1). The first stage involved screening for journal quality based on our outlined criteria (Screening A). The second stage consisted of screening articles for relevancy at the level of the title, abstract and keywords (Screening B) followed by an in-depth examination of the full text in the last stage (Screening C). Any duplicates resulting from two (or more) strubgs of the search operators used in each ED were then eliminated to form a final sample of articles for review (Final Sample). We provide a more detailed version of our search findings per database in Table 8 of the Supplementary Material 6 As Fig. 2 graphs only lists journals that have 2 or more articles in our sample, a more comprehensive graph is found in the Supplementary Material Fig. 10 7 Table 5 provides a complete list of the number publications per journal and database in addition to SJR, JIF ranking, ABDC and Q-score rankings of outlets as of 15 June 2022 or latest rank available. Both British and American English derivations of the word digitization were used to ensure retrieval of as many relevant articles as possible A review of conceptual papers from our sample can be found in the Supplementary Materials Fig. 1. Systematic review process. Table 2 Article screening, filtering and selection. Database Search Screening A Screening B Screening C Final approval ScienceDirect Wiley Emerald Taylor &Francis Totals 11846 1154 1457 1556 1740 17753 7938 761 302 689 1128 10818 512 102 52 88 310 1064 161 20 29 31 152 393 74 9 70 166 Note: Screening A = Post Quality Filtering, Screening B = Post Title, Abstract and Keyword Inspection, Screening C = Post Deep Read, Final Approval = Final approved after removing duplicates. Fig. 2. Number of reviewed articles per journal and year. Note: This graph displays the number of articles per journal and year. For aesthetic purposes, we only display 125 articles from 18 journals (i.e., only journals that a minimum of 2 articles in our sample). A more comprehensive graph (that includes 166 articles in 58 journals) can be found in the supplementary document (as Fig. 1). journals. The authors examined the quality in terms of the quantile scores, 3.6% of articles (6) were from 4 outlets with a score of 3.000 scores revealing that approximately 94% of articles (156) were from 49 and above. Another 13.3% of articles (22) were from 6 outlets with outlets with the highest score of Q1, 13.8% of articles (9) were from SJR scores between 2.0002.999, 28.9% of articles (48) from 20 outlets 8 outlets with the highest Q-score of Q2, and 1.7% of articles (1) had with scores ranging from 1.000 to 1.999. A 53.6% majority of articles no Q-score. Meanwhile, in terms of the Scimago Journal Rank (SJR) (89) were from 27 outlets with an SJR score lower than 1.000. Fig. 3. Title co-occurrence analysis. The review also analyzed publication outlets in our sample in terms of journal impact factor (JIF) scores. Within the sample the lowest JIF score was 0.889 (Global Economic Review) and the highest the 14.982 (Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews). Moreover, 6.0% of articles (10) were from 9 outlets with impact factors lower than 3.0, whereas a 62.6% (104) majority of articles were from 26 outlets with impact factors between 3.0 and 5.9. Articles published in 11 outlets with an impact factors between 6.0 and 8.9 accounted for 13.9% (23) of the sample. In addition, 12.0% of articles (20) came from 5 outlets with impact factors greater than 9.0, whereas 5.4% (9) were from 7 outlets that did not have a JIF score. Among all five databases, /Science Direct had the widest range of journal impact factors (from 2.497 to 14.982). In addition, both the lowest and highest SJR scores of 0.550 (Heliyon) and 4.580 (International Journal of Information Management) were from this database. Notably 100% of outlets from /Science Direct in our retrieved sample had the highest Q-score of Q1. Meanwhile, the largest proportion of publications from a single journal were from the Journal of Environmental Science and Pollution Research (curated by ) at 55 articles (or 33.1%), followed by Journal of Cleaner Production and Technological Forecasting and Social Change at 13 (7.8%) and 11 (6.6%) articles respectively (both in /Science Direct). ICT/digitization. According to this analysis, four clusters emerged, as highlighted by the gold (7 items), blue (5 items), purple (3 items) and orange (2 items) clusters. As can be expected, among the most frequently cited words were ICT/information communication technology (with 101 occurrences) and environmental sustainability (with 33 occurrences) which were in separate clusters. Interestingly, China (with 23 occurrences) was found to be the third most cited term. It can be inferred from this that a significant amount of research in the sample may concern the pollution emitted by this country, presumably because of the contribution of heavy industry in this country as a result of outsourced manufacturing and/or international trade. Analyzing the most cited terms within the abstracts of our retrieved studies revealed three clusters, colored beige (13 items), blue (10 items) and green (8 items). As seen in Fig. 4, the most cited terms in the abstracts are sustainability and energy (85 and 61 occurrences, respectively) from the same cluster, and with 30 links each to other terms in the abstracts, as well as efficiency from the green cluster and long term effects from the blue cluster (both with 35 occurrences each). These two terms had a similar number of links (26 and 25, respectively) to other terms. The close relationship among these most cited terms from our sample indicates the particular interest in these areas within environmental sustainability research. Despite the ability of ICT/digitization to improve efficiency in the service and manufacturing sectors, for instance, empirical consideration of the long-term effects of ICT on the environment have also seen a lot of traction within the literature. A similar level of concern can be gauged from the network visualization of the network of terms in the abstracts of our retrieved studies considering the links between the three most cited terms and internet penetration. Fig. 5 illustrates a co-occurrence analysis of the keyword terms from articles retrieved. Keyword analysis in this case revealed a much more extensive network of the terms used in our sample with five clusters, colored blue and red/orange (both 12 items each), green (7 items), yellow (6 items) and purple (5 items). In the red/orange cluster, the term CO2 emissions (with 128 occurrences) was among the most cited and was strongly linked to economic analysis and economic growth (93 and 65 occurrences, respectively). In the green cluster, the top cited terms are ICT/information communication technology (110 occurrences), SDG (with 53 occurrences) and environmental sustainability (50 occurrences). All of these terms have 41 links to other keywords, 3.2.2. Bibliometric analysis of articles Extant systematic literature reviews have proposed several methods of analyzing and visualizing bibliometric networks (e.g., van Eck and Waltman ). VOSviewer version 1.6.188 was used to analyze three aspects, namely the co-occurrence of titles, abstracts and keywords within the body of retrieved literature. The higher the number of cooccurrences of the terms, the closer they will be clustered on the maps as illustrated in Figs. 3, 4 and 5. Analyzing keywords in this manner provides researchers with an understanding of the themes represented by research articles and an overview of the associated links and the strength of the links between the terms in a particular topic. Fig. 3 illustrates the network of the most cited terms used in the titles of the retrieved articles on environmental sustainability and 8 VOSviewer software uses sophisticated text mining functionality to visualize network layout and network clusters. Fig. 4. Abstract co-occurrence analysis. Fig. 5. Keywords co-occurrence analysis. indicating the strong relationships among them within the network of terms. Among the most cited terms in the other three clusters were environmental economics (40 occurrences), technological innovation and environmental technology (in one cluster with 34 and 32 occurrences respectively), and sustainability and renewable energy (38 and 35 occurrences respectively). Links among this latter set of terms ranged from 39 to 40 as well. We find that Among the 147 empirical studies that examined the impact of one or more measures of ICT measures on environmental sustainability, approximately 38.8% (57 articles) were single country Fig. 6. Geographical breakdown of the sample of single countries studied. Fig. 7. Breakdown of group country studies. Notes: SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa, OECD = Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, BRICS = Major emerging economies: Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa, G7/G20 =Group of Seven/Twenty, MENA = Middle East and North Africa, ASEAN = Association of Southeast Asian Nations. 4. Results of the systematic review investigations whereas around 61.2% (90 articles) investigated the ICT environmental nexus across a group of countries. Figs. 6 and 7 illustrate the distribution of articles graphically in the form of a choropleth map and a treemap. Fig. 6 shows a clear research emphasis on China, with more than half of the single-country studies focusing exclusively on this country (31 articles) and its various provinces, followed by Pakistan (9 articles) and Tunisia (3 articles). Tied at two articles each were Australia, India, Korea and Morocco, while Saudi Arabia, Turkey, the US and South Africa were tied at one article each. Studies on country groups were split by region and recognized blocs (as seen in Fig. 7). The largest category included international studies (24 articles) consisting of aggregated global data for a mix countries at various economic development levels. Studies focusing on Southeast Asia or the Asia Pacific form the second-largest category (12 articles), followed by Europe (10 articles), emerging countries (9 articles) and Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) (7 articles). Another 28 articles were split between the recognized blocs (ASEAN, OECD, BrazilRussiaIndiaChinaSouth Africa (BRICS), Belt and Road, Middle East and North Africa (MENA), and Group of countries, as well as countries in Africa, North America and Latin America. This section aimed to synthesize and discuss the empirical findings of the 147 empirical studies9 in the review which corresponded to 297 associations or relationships10 reviewed in the sample. The discussion of studies has been broken down into negative and positive and nonlinear relationships or associations. To clarify, negative associations with environmental degradation imply the positive effects of ICT/digitization and the reverse for a positive association with environmental degradation. Additionally, the review distinguished studies that found an absence of any relationships among the variables of interest. This allowed the researchers to delineate the association between ICT/digitization and environmental degradation from several perspectives. We provide further analysis on the types of econometric methods, models and data types employed in empirical studies reviewed in the Supplementary Materials. 10 In this section we analyze findings based on 297 association/relationships due to the fact that some empirical papers in the sample investigate the impact of more than one ICT/digitization measure on one (or more) environmental sustainability measures. Table 3 Environmental sustainability proxies used in retrieved articles. Measure Use per paper Proxy Freq. of use 114 CO2e (metric tons kilo tons per capita) (annual) CO2e intensity (in kgequivalent energy use) CO2e from liquid fuel consumption (% of total) CO2e from standard coal consumption (7 Mcal) CO2e from electricity and heat production, total (% of total fuel combustion) CO2e from transport (% of total) CO2e from service secondary industry CO2e from other sectors (% total) CO2e from manufacturing industries and construction (% of total) CO2e from residential buildings and commercial and public services (% of total) CH4e (kt of CO2 equivalent) N2O emissions (thousand metric tons of CO2 equivalent) Greenhouse gasses emissions (GHG) SO2e (per 1000 people) SO2e in air pollution per unit land (ASO unit: kg2) Life cycle emissions of e-bikes Carbon emission efficiency (CEE) Urban air pollution level 118 23 18 Carbon intensity (CO2e % of GDP per capita) The proportionate of net income to the total amount of CO2 emission equivalent National resources taxes (levied when natural resources are extracted) Natural resource rent (% of GDP used to measure resource richness) Proportion of total investment in industrial pollution control to the added value of industry Carbon tax (GDP deflator) Coal rents (% of GDP) Natural gas rents (% of GDP) Oil rents (% of GDP) Mineral rents (% of GDP) Governments Environmental Protection Expenditure (GEPE) 11 Forest land required to absorb CO2e in global hectares per capita Biocapacity (in global hectares) Forest depletion (% of GNI) Natural resource depletion (% of GNI) Material Flows (Thousand Tons) Greenness level (green area per capita) Environmental damage (CO2e in metric tons (1000 kg) divided by total number of habitats) Environmental impact of consumption pattern (Million tons) Resource allocation efficiency Pollution Waste Chemical oxygen demand discharge in water pollution per unit land (ACOD; unit: 105 kg2) Industrial smoke dust (powder) emissions (total amount generated) E-waste generation (kg per inhabitant) Industrial wastewater discharge Industrial waste gas discharge Industrial solid waste generation Urban living garbage Noise from neighbors and from the street (% of population). Environmental regulatory capacity (sewage treatment rate of the sampled cities) EF Ecological Footprint (forest land required to absorb CO2 emissions in global hectares per capita) EPI Environmental Performance Index 14 Green total factor energy efficiency Index Volatility of Green Growth Index UN 17 Sustainable Development Goals Total Factor Carbon Productivity (TFCP) Triple Bottom Line Sustainability Pillars Water Footprint Carbon Footprint Carbon Pricing Natural Resource Other Measures E-waste generation (equipment for temperature exchange; screens; lamps; large equipment; small equipment; and small IT and telecommunication). Water Footprint (gray = volume of freshwater required to dilute a load of pollutants so that the quality of the receiving water body remains within specific quality standards). (which were less common in the literature). The researchers found that an overwhelming majority of retrieved articles (114 or 77.6%) empirically investigated proxies that were based on climate change and air pollution, which were combined into the carbon footprint category. Within this category, the basic proxy of CO2 emissions (per metric ton) is used widely, followed by the intensity of carbon emissions and CO2 emissions from specific uses such as the consumption of liquid fuel , electricity, heat, and transport. The second largest category is that of other environmental measures (with 14 articles 9.5%), which consisted of a mix of sustainable development goals (SDGs), triple bottom line and green growth or efficiency indices (amongst others). This may serve as some an indication of researchers attempting to branch out and examine the relationship in alternative ways. 4.1. Analysis of the proxies of environmental sustainability and ICT/digitization The review of the articles in our sample revealed interesting insights into the use of proxies for environmental sustainability and ICT/digitization by researchers in empirical studies. Several proxies for these two dimensions were identified and attempted to group them into categories following our discussions on their development, measurement and alternative definitions, as seen in Tables 3 and 4. 4.1.1. Analysis of environmental sustainability Related proxies of environmental sustainability were grouped into (Table 3) into the categories of carbon footprint, carbon pricing, natural resources, pollution or waste and other environmental measures Table 4 ICTProxies used in retrieved articles. 56 Individuals using the Internet (% of population)/Internet users (per 100 people) Internet Penetration (% of total population) Internet Access (% of Population)/(number of people connected to the internet normalized on population); Broadband Subscriptions (Total) Fixed broadband Internet subscribers (per 100 people) 26 16 41 Sum/PCA of internet, mobile, and fixed telephone subscription data (per 100 inhabitants) ICT development index Technological Innovations Index 30 Mobile subscribers /Mobile cellular subscription/Cellular subscribers (all are per 100 people) Mobile penetration (% of population) 54 Imported ICT goods (% over total imports) ICT service exports (BoP, current US$) per capita ICT exports Exported ICT goods (% of over total exports) ICT-Trade Openness Index (sum of real values of ICT imports and exports as % of real GDP) Digital trade level (total value of digital trade imports and exports); High-Technology Exports (% of manufactured exports and agricultural machinery) Telecommunication revenue (% of GDP). Digital technology level (ratio of digital investment to all investment in a region) ICT capital investment; ICT price index ICT capital stock ICT capital depreciation rate Technology investment scale (R&D expenditure); 13 Fixed Telephone subscribers (per 100 people) Telephone subscriptions (Total) 21 Digital Financial Index Digital Economy Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI) Personal Computers (PCs) (per 100 people) ICT Capital (Hardware, software and communications) Network Readiness Index 19 Sustainable ICT (Process optimization, Media substitution, and Externalization of control) Composite Smart Transport Index Satellite Nighttime Light Data e-Bike availability e-Bike usage Subscribers to streaming service Streaming duration Electronic Finance (sales of consumer goods by Internet) % of enterprises selling online Blockchain adoption (binary variable equal to 1 if firm has adopted blockchain technology and 0 otherwise) Medium and high-tech industry (% of manufacturing industry value-added) Internet ICT Composite Indices Mobile ICT Trade ICT Investment Telephone Digital Economy Indices Electronic Devices NRI Other ICT Measures ICT exports = computers and peripheral equipment, communication equipment, consumer electronic equipment, electronic components etc. ICT development index = Internet penetration rate, number of Internet-related employees, Internet-related output, mobile Internet users, and the inclusive development of digital finance. Digital Economy = economic activities that rely on digitized information and knowledge as fundamental production elements i.e., the internet, cloud computing, big data, fintech, and other emerging digital technologies. Composite Smart Transport Index = Transportation supply, Residential transportation consumption, Transportation service affordability, Transportation infrastructure, Transportation efficiency, Transportation technology. Technological Innovations Index =ICT service exports as % of service exports, computer communications as a % of commercial service exports, fixed telephone subscriptions (per 100 people), internet users as % of the population, number of patent applications, and R&D expenditures as % of GDP. However, research on the environmental sustainability ICT/digitization nexus has shown an apparent failure to consider comprehensive environmental sustainability indices in empirical studies. In this regard, we found that only 6.8% of studies use indices such as EF (seven articles) and EPI (three articles), which we categorized separately in Table 4. Given that a large majority of studies our sample were based on groups countries, the use of global indices is expected and would make for more holistic contributions to empirical analyses of the nexus in question (we discuss this further in Section 6). Other categories such as natural resources and waste/pollution have seldom been used in the retrieved literature (four and three articles respectively). An interesting observation could be seen for the carbon pricing category (five articles), which comprised the most recent publications. The category itself included proxies that are linked to the monetary/economic considerations of environmental degradation/sustainability such as carbon taxes, fossil fuels and mineral rents, and expenditure by governments for protecting the environment or controlling pollution (among others). The authors concluded from this that stakeholders and researchers have recently taken a interest in the monetary policies used to curb emissions in tandem with the potential for ICT/digitization as a way to improve environmental sustainability. 4.1.2. Analysis of the proxies of ICT/digitization The analysis of the results of the selected articles also revealed interesting tendencies regarding the use of proxies for ICT/digitization. Proxies identified were grouped into 10 categories, as seen in Table 4. The most commonly used measure, which the researchers termed internet (50 articles), grouped the measures related to broadband subscribers or internet subscribers or internet penetration. This category was followed closely by mobile (30 articles), which consisted of mainly proxies measuring cellular phone subscribers/mobile penetration. Together with the category telephone (13 articles), a large majority of studies proxied ICT by using these three categories. In some cases, proxies from two or all of these categories were combined to form 12 Table 5 Publication outlets of articles reviewed. Database journal # of articles Science Direct Building and Environment Economic Analysis and Policy Energy Energy and Buildings Energy Reports Environmental Impact Assessment Review Environmental Science & Policy International Economics International Journal of Information Management Marine Policy Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews Science of The Total Environment Sustainable Cities and Society Technological Forecasting and Social Change Telecommunications Policy Transport Policy Air Quality, Atmosphere & Health Energy, Ecology and Environment Environmental and Resource Economics International Journal of Coal Science & Technology Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change Quality & Quantity The European Journal of Development Research Wireless Personal Communications 55 Taylor & Francis Applied Economics Carbon Management Economics of Innovation and New Technology Energy Sources, Part B: Economics, Planning, and Policy Environmental Sociology Global Economic Review International Journal of Digital Earth International Journal of Sustainable Development & World Ecology International Journal of Lean Six Sigma International Journal of Logistics Management Journal of Economic and Administrative Sciences Journal of Enterprise Information Management Management of Environmental Quality: An International Journal International Journal of Finance and Economics Grand Total SJR score JIF rank Highest Q-score ABDC rank 3.060 1.500 1.917 0.770 2.040 1.680 2.550 2.093 0.890 1.050 0.550 3.570 4.580 1.920 1.480 1.170 3.680 1.880 1.460 1.81 2.02 1.36 2.226 1.14 0.84 1.567 1.730 0.740 9.746 6.456 5.389 2.497 7.147 5.879 7.042 4.039 6.870 4.549 5.581 3.373 14.098 9.297 6.789 4.173 14.982 8.001 5.634 7.963 7.587 5.032 5.846 4.192 3.036 6.182 4.674 2.812 Q1 A B A* C 0.420 0.680 1.420 0.830 1.430 0.940 0.810 0.870 0.930 0.480 3.763 3.219 2.181 4.223 6.191 3.583 1.072 2.297 1.671 Q2 0.560 0.580 0.570 0.800 1.010 0.250 0.900 1.835 3.182 3.034 2.459 3.205 0.889 3.538 3.716 0.390 0.790 1.193 0.970 0.820 3.329 3.325 5.396 2.240 1.320 10.302 3.07 6.159 Notes: SJR = SCImago Journal Rank , JIF = Journal Impact Factor, ABDC = Australian Business Deans Council, Q-score = Quantile score. a composite ICT Index (41 articles) which are categorized separately. As in the case of environmental sustainability, we also categorize less commonly seen proxies under Other ICT measures (14 articles). Again, the researchers found that studies seldom used global indices for ICT/digitization in the sample. Proxies were categorized as electronic devices (4 articles), digital economy indices (6 articles) and ICT investment (4 articles) were seldom used in the sample of retrieved studies. However, we find the ICT trade category (18 articles) was found to have are of a foothold in the ICT/digitization literature. The researchers gather that this is because of concerns about the potential rebound effects of technology, the import/export of ICT on environmental sustainability, which has a nonlinear trend . Table 6 Data and stationary types in retrieved empirical studies summary. Data type Stationarity Count % Time series Stationary Non-Stationary Mixed 24 1.4% 16.3% 4.1% Not Mentioned 49 9.5% 21.1% 14.3% 33.3% Total 147 100.0% Panel 32 21.8% 77.5% Fig. 8. Single country findings on environmental sustainabilityICT relationships. 1 each in the cases of Tunisia , Turkey , Iran , Saudi Arabia and the United States . For the 117 group-based associations, 35 originated from investigations of international studies that include a wide array of countries (developed and developing/emerging) [36,105123]. Moreover, 15 negative associations were found in investigations of countries from South Asia and Asia Pacific regions [18,124130], 13 in European Union [19,131136], and 7 from the African continent (2 general + 5 SSA) [34,137140]. The remaining group-based negative associations were found for recognized blocs with 18 for emerging economies [141147], 11 for ASEAN [25,148], 9 for BRICS [149153], 4 investigations for OECD countries [154158], 2 each for Belt and Road countries [159,160], and Group of countries (i.e., G7 or G20) [12,161], and 1 for Latin America . It can be inferred from this that empirical evidence of the potential of ICT/digitization improving environmental quality is spread globally, especially in countries that have bilateral agreements that make them part of a bloc of recognized countries such as BRICS. What is of interest, however, is whether these negative relationships were dependent on the measures of ICT/digitization and environmental sustainability used to investigate the formers impact on the latter. These measures accounted for 79% of the negative associations found in both single-country and group-studies, with 47 instances for internet subscriptions, 32 for mobile subscriptions and 8 for telephone subscriptions. Additionally, the ICT index, which is a combination of these three measures, accounted for an additional 18.9% of negative associations. Considering that ICT-environmental sustainability literature has long used these measures, we refer to them as traditional measures and 4.2. Analysis of the types of relationship This section examines the nexus between ICT/digitization and environmental sustainability in terms of the associations studied in our selected empirical literature. Figs. 8 and 9 provide a graphical illustration of the types of linear and nonlinear associations found.11 In Supplementary Materials Tables 9, 10, and 11 provide a thorough analysis of the econometric methods and models employed in the empirical papers reviewed. Table 6 in this review summarizes the data types and stationarity used in said papers. 4.2.1. Negative linear relationships Among the 175 negative relationships (out of a total 297) identified between ICT/digitization and environmental sustainability, 58 associations are from single-country studies (representing 33.1% of all negative relationships) and 117 were group-based studies (representing around 66.9% of all negative relationships). Among the 58 negative associations examining 10 individual, 40 were found in the case of China [7,8,32,6490]; 7 in the case of Pakistan [9195]; 2 each in the cases of India , Korea [97,98] and Morocco [99,100], and finally In some cases, more than one type of association was found in a given single- or group-based study and therefore cited in several sections (i.e. both linear negative and linear positive relationship sections, etc.). However, in the case multiple associations with the same result was found via several econometric methods used, only one association is counted (either linear, nonlinear or absent) in this case. Fig. 9. Group country findings on environmental sustainabilityICT relationships. attribute the heavy reliance on such measures in empirical studies due to the wider availability of macro data on internet, mobile and fixedtelephone subscribers in databases such as the WDI from the World Bank, a common sources for data in our sample. In total, 8% of negative relationship used less common proxies for ICT/ digitization (such as night-time satellite data or sustainable ICT indices, among others) in their examinations of environmental sustainability. This is an indication of researchers having attempted to branch out and examine the relationship in alternative ways. Further incorporation of new proxies for ICT/digitization would strengthen this stream of the literature by demarcating in which circumstances the negative relationship with environmental degradation would hold. As explained in Section 6, the proxies being investigated in the literature do not account for the micro effects of ICT /digitization on environmental sustainability or its degradation. For example, it is still unclear how an additional internet subscriber will increase or decrease emission levels. The matter is further complicated when taking into account the life cycle of the ICT equipment used, the infrastructure to support it and how these will later contribute to a possible nullification of any abatement gained, as in the case of rebound effects. Similarly, 81.1% (141 out of 175) of all negative relationships used carbon footprint measures to investigate the effect of ICT/digitization on environmental sustainability for single-country and group-based studies. This indicates that the authors of studies in the sample of the literature predominantly examined the effects of technology on the environment through the lens of emissions such as carbon dioxide and their interconnections with heat, electricity, and fossil fuels, for instance. Among the remaining negative relationships, 2.8% (5) used waste related measures, 2.3% (4) used carbon pricing measures, 3.4% (6) and 1.7% (3) used EF and EPI indices, respectively, and 8.6% used less common proxies for environmental sustainability. glaring difference is the mix of characteristics of the countries included in the group-based studies. For instance, differences exist in the levels of economic development, the ICT infrastructure and industrial capacity. Developed countries are characterized by an advanced development of ICT, ranking higher in terms of access, use, literacy and energy efficiency in ICT. This group of countries are also responsible for much of research and development in ICT hardware and software, along with the associated first-, second- and third-order effects resulting from this advancement. On the other hand, emerging and developing countries rank lower in such indices and are mostly ICT importers. They also import much of the e-waste that is exported by developed countries. Among the 15 positive relationships found in single-country studies, nine (the majority,) were from Pakistan [93,94,162165], three were from China [83,166], followed by 1 each from Saudi Arabia , Turkey and South Africa . Of the 67 positive associations found in group-based studies, the majority (13) were from international studies [106,112,114,117,169,170], an aggregate of 12 were from Africa (1 general + 11 SSA) [9,137139,171], 10 were from South Asia and the Asia Pacific region [18,126,172175], followed closely by 9 from the European Union [19,131,176,177] and 1 from North America . Among recognized blocs, 10 (out of 67) were from emerging economies [142,143,145,146,179], 4 were from BRICS [152, 180], 3 were from Belt and Road countries [181183], 2 were from the MENA region , and 1 were from the Group of countries , ASEAN and OECD . Regarding the dependence of results on the proxies for ICT/digitization, the researchers found that both internet and mobile subscription measures accounted for 19.5% (16 out of 82) of all positive associations whereas telephone subscriptions accounted for 8.5% (7). Despite the figures being lower in comparison with the negative relationships identified for the same indicators, they remained the top indicators used for both single-country and group-based studies in the sample. An additional 24.4% (20) of positive associations made use of the aforementioned composite ICT index, 8.5% (7) included measures of ICT trade measures, 7.3% (6) ICT investment measures, and about 11% (9) used less common ICT/digitization proxies. Again, there is an indication of branching out to other proxies for ICT/digitization considering these figures were dwarfed by use of the aforementioned traditional proxies. 4.2.2. Positive linear relationships In all, the review of empirical papers yielded a total of 82 positive associations (out of a total 297) between ICT/digitization and environmental sustainability or, in other words, increased environmental degradation. Single-country based studies accounted for only 15 (or 18.3%) of these positive associations whereas the rest (67 associations or 81.7%) belonged to group-based studies. One explanation for this 15 A large majority of the positive relationships from the studies in the sample, 80.5% (66 out of 82) involved examinations of the carbon footprint measure. This is noteworthy for two reasons. First, researchers have relied on carbon footprint as a proxy when examining the impact of ICT/digitization on the environment across single-country and group-based studies. Second, when comparing these figures with those of negative relationships, using carbon footprint to proxy for environmental degradation can yield varying results. This was more prominent however for group-based studies (at 68.3%) than those for single-countries. As for the rest of the positive relationships, 7.3% (6) included the use of the EF index, 4.9% (4) used natural resource-related measures, and both carbon pricing measures, and the combination of less common proxies for environmental sustainability were used by 3.7% (3) respectively. Differences in the short- and long-term effects of digitization on the environment in particular regions gives credence to empirical investigations of nonlinear relationships and the characteristics that underpin them. These nonlinear findings indicate the importance of establishing thresholds for technologies such as the internet and mobile phones so as to maintain a net negative effect on CO2 emissions. These serve as useful implications for policy makers when attempting to enhance the role of ICT governance mechanisms in their respective regions, as will be discussed in Section 5. 4.2.4. Absence of relationships A modest percentage of studies revealed an absence of a significant relationships. We found 25 (8.4%) instances in the associations between ICT/digitization and environmental sustainability in our sample for the cases of Tunisia [190,191], a study of the majority of EU countries , and a study of aggregated global data . Rieger investigated 23 EU nations, plus Turkey and Switzerland, for the period of 2005 to 2017 to test the decoupling hypothesis for ICT with respect to dematerialization. In doing so, the authors used a PraisWinsten regression model to test the relationship between a composite ICT index (consisting of broadband subscriptions, the percentage of households with Internet access, mobile and telephone subscriptions) and material consumption/flows12 . However, the relationship between material flows and ICT-use was found to be statistically insignificant. Rieger did not find evidence that ICTuse can increase material use. What this suggests, therefore, is that both positive and negative effects are possible. For instance, higher ICT consumption and the associated material use is being masked by more efficient ICT, thereby requiring less materials . In Tunisia, Amri ,Amri et al. examined how total factor productivity, trade, financial development, and a composite ICT index (consisting of mobile and fixed telephone penetration) as a proxy of ICT, affected the CO2 emissions in the country over the period of 1975 2014 . However, unlike in other studies of MENA countries studies, ICTs impact on CO2 emissions was found to be positive but insignificant in both instances [190,191]. Furthermore, the EKC hypothesis of nonlinear relationships between the measures and their investigated economic elements was also rejected. Nevertheless, the authors suggested that further ICT utilization and investment should be made, especially for polluting sectors such as construction, transportation and industry. In Ndri et al. s international study, the authors attempted to identify a long-term relationship between a composite ICT index (consisting of mobile and fixed-telephone penetration) and CO2 emissions in 58 developing countries from 1990 to 2014. Using the pooled mean group (PMG) specification of the ARDL model, they found a negative association for low-income economies, but did not find similar evidence for high-income economies. It can be surmised, therefore, that the findings of the above-mentioned authors [110,190,191] do not detract from the body of literature that support ICT/digitizations role in abating CO2 emission in developing countries, but suggest that a portion of these insignificant associations may be caused by reliance on traditional measures such as mobile and fixed-telephone subscriptions (without internet). These findings are to be distinguished from those of because their sample of countries differed in terms of economic development. 4.2.3. Nonlinear relationships Although most of the studies investigating the ICT/digitization environmental sustainability nexus have assumed that the relationship is linear, only a few, namely the recent, have explored the possible non-linearity of this relationship (quadratic and cubic relationships). Precisely, of the 297 associations, 3 were found to be U-shaped, 10 had an inverted U-shaped, and 2 had an inverted N-shape. In the following section, these different non-linear relationships are discussed. Nonlinear U-shaped and inverted U-shaped relationships: As mentioned above, evidence for quadratic (U-shaped and inverted U-shaped) relationships between ICT/digitization and environmental sustainability were found (13 associations) in the sample [11,19,34,102,166,187 189]. Investigating the case of Turkey, Bar-Tzemen et al. found evidence of a range of linear and nonlinear relationships between a composite of traditional ICT measures (internet, telephone and mobile subscriptions) and CO2 emissions. Evidence for both U-shaped and inverted U-shaped relationships was found by Asongu in their sample from SSA. An inverted U-shape was found by Anser et al. in the case of 26 EU countries, by Faisal et al. in the case of BRICS countries (minus Russia) and by Shi et al. in the case of China. Additionally, inverted U-shaped effects were also observed by Hign et al. and Ike et al. in the cases of international studies consisting of 142 and 153 countries, respectively . Among the measures of ICT/digitization investigated, internet penetration was found to have nonlinear inverted U-shaped relationships with CO2 emissions when examined separately [19,187,189] and part of a composite ICT index . Using less a common ICT measure, namely remotely-sensed night-time-light (NTL) data, Shi et al. examined their effect on three types of CO2 emissions. Specifically, the authors found an inverted U-shaped relationship between NTL and CO2 emissions from the service industry. Nonlinear N-shaped relationships: Evidence of other forms of nonlinear relationships (inverted N-shaped relationships in particular) were found for a total of two associations in the cases of Turkey and China . As mentioned in the previous subsection, Bar-Tzemen et al. investigate the nonlinear relationships between a composite of traditional ICT measures and CO2 emissions. However, the authors found contradictory results depending on the approach used namely quantile regression or autoregressive distributive lagged (ARDL) regression . On the one hand, they found a statistically significant inverted N-shaped relationship for these measures using ARDL; first reducing, then increasing, and then reducing CO2 emissions again. On the other hand, they found a mix of relationships, namely U-shaped, positive and inverted N-shaped relationships, with levels of significance that varied from one quantile to another. Moreover, the small coefficient sizes for their inverted N-shaped quantile results indicated that, in Turkeys case at least, the ICT/digitization measures used were not a suitable determinant of environmental pollution . The authors reasoned, that low ICT integration in the sectors of agriculture, industry, services, education, and health sectors may be a reason for the inconsistent findings for the period investigated. 4.3. Insights from conceptual studies The sample of select publications included 19 conceptual articles, case studies and literature reviews. One of their objectives was to augment the discussion of the channels through which ICT/digitization impacts environmental sustainability. The current review classified the 19 selected articles into five categories, as detailed below. The author focuses on imports and other forms for domestic extraction, including a majority of solids, liquids, and gases aside for air and water. 4.3.1. Achieving sustainable development goals via ICT/digitization Articles falling into this first group are related to the four SDGs of environmental sustainability (Goals 1215 of the 17 SDGs)13 . Most of these articles examined how the SDGs can be realized using solar energy technologies , telecommunications infrastructure , information management systems and digital ledger (and/or blockchain) technology . According to Adenle , research and development programs such as that for solar energy technologies can mitigate climate change by reducing fossil fuel consumption and lowering air pollution (SDG 13). However, the lack of financing for such ICT and the associated market development programs means that the deployment of these technologies is still fragmented and uncoordinated, especially in the case of African communities, for example . Another pathway for fulfilling the SDGs and improving environmental sustainability is through the use of existing and next-generation wireless and mobile communications systems (5G and 6G) for their capacity to improve resource efficiency . Nevertheless, how these technologies and the associated infrastructure are designed, manufactured, used and disposed of present important challenges in themselves. The conceptual literature in this regards suggests that the six Rs (reducing, reusing, recycling, recovering, redesigning and remanufacturing) of the components, devices and the resulting e-waste materials should be considered to avoid further environmental degradation . Among the other new technologies that promise to help in achieving the SDGs is digital ledger technology. Blockchain, a form of digital ledger technology, can used for enhancing supply chains and tracing the movement of goods in this regard (SGD 12). According to Parmentola et al. , blockchain can also be used to create mechanisms that reward sustainable behaviors and penalize those that are environmentally damaging in terms of water pollution or harming biodiversity (SDGs 14 and 15, respectively). However, cautioned that blockchain has been linked to significant increases in energy consumption, with the consequent CO2 emissions acting negatively on other SDGs (SDG 13). Dwivedi et al. suggested that a possible solution to energy consumption issues by such technologies or the mining of cryptocurrency, for example, is to create more efficient blocks at a faster rate, thus being more productive and profitable. Essentially, therefore, solutions can be produced by the same technology, compensating for the unintended consequences of ICT/digitization causes for 4.3.3. The role of smart city components in environmental sustainability This category of conceptual studies offered overarching insights for businesses, transportation services and urban planners on how to leverage existing and emerging ICT/digitization technologies and derive benefits for environmental sustainability. For instance, in a case study by Wang et al. , ICT solutions for transportation/fleet management were found to have a significant positive impact on reducing CO2 emissions. However, going beyond their findings and/or further enhancing this reduction would require collaboration on the part of retailers/competitors to allow for more efficient sharing of the distribution networks for their respective goods . In their case study on the future of European passenger transportation, Noussan and Tagliapietra conducted scenario analyses by weighing the potential positive and negative effects of digitalization on the demand for mobility, the associated CO2 emissions and energy consumption under various assumptions. They framed the impact via the concepts of responsible and selfish digitalization, where the former promotes sustainable mobility while the latter is concerned with maximizing the utility of the final users. Nevertheless, the significant negative impact of digitalization was expected to be somewhat compensated for by the strong expected increase in the efficiency of vehicles . Although scenario analyses are valuable in the development of smart transportation, organizations and policy makers also require frameworks to guide them through pathways towards environmental degradation/green recovery. In their framework, Sharma et al. proposed ICT/digitization technologies that enable the achievement of energy and resource efficiency goals via capabilities such as intelligent parking and traffic management, predictive maintenance, automated toll collection, improved surveillance, real-time traffic information and monitoring the level of pollution. Other technologies such as e-bikes, albeit with more modest CO2 savings per person and requiring adequate support by the local government, offer the communities the chance to decarbonize car fleets . Zhao et al. investigated the installation of wireless sensor networks in metropolitan areas that give grid operators better flexibly and insights into transportation systems. ICT/digitization, in this case, would allow for cheaper energy prices with fewer management delays in renewable energy systems. It is believed that in the not-so-distant future, all networks can be connected to form a single electronic skin around the planet . 4.3.4. Benefits and challenges of ICT-based societies The complex nature of the nexus between ICT/digitization and environmental sustainability has given rise to several myths, as argued by Fuchs . For instance, one such myth relates to the ability of teleworking/remote working to reduce pollution thanks to less need to travel. In reality, only a small proportion of employees have this privilege. Furthermore, telework can also generate new social relationships and therefore increase the need for travel . According to Moyer and Hughes , the penetration of broadband internet has the potential to reduce carbon emissions via two pathways (1) reducing the energy intensity and (2) increasing the production of new forms of renewable energy. However, the net effect is not particularly large because of the consequential reduction in energy prices, which leads to an offset in energy demand and increased competition between carbon-based fuels and renewable alternatives . 4.3.2. The role of ICT/digitization in energy consumption Increased ICT/digitization has repercussions for the environment through the energy consumed by data centers, as discussed by the second group of articles. Forge cited the problem of increased demand driven by internet penetration, e-commerce and portals with abundant web servers. Some of the resulting issues that still need to be addressed surround inefficiencies in the distribution of electricity within data centers, the energy spent on cooling the servers contained within them, and the relatively stagnant performance of chip sets per watt . Moreover, the true values in terms of consumption in these areas are largely elusive, especially with regard to future changes in demand . The integration of technologies such as blockchain with renewable energy systems under the circular economy is one recommendation to eliminate issues with the process of managing energy grids . However, it is important to remember the investment costs and technological infrastructure required to actualize such innovations and improve the management of energy. 4.3.5. ICT/digitization in the manufacturing industry IoT, sensors and real-time information on manufacturing processes can reduce machines downtime and enable the rapid identification of water/energy resources that are being used inappropriately . Using digital product services and systems, or integrating of digital aspects into products to provide intelligent services improves products lifecycles and robustness from the early stages of design to delivery. According to Zhou and Song , this has the two-pronged benefits of increasing business profitability as well as environmental sustainability, propelling this type of integration to become an important Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a collection of 17 interlinked global goals designed by United Nations General Assembly (UN-GA) to be a blueprint to achieve a better and more sustainable future for all. Goals concerned with environmental sustainability include SDG 12: Responsible consumption and production, SDG 13: Climate action, SDG 14: Life Below Water, and SDG 15: Life on land 17 that could promote knowledge of environmental sustainability . In this same vein, Shobande and Asongu have recommended promoting sustainable values and ICT usage to improve environmental quality. Some other articles have stressed the importance of setting up strategies and policies designed to unify and standardize data related to environmental degradation and climate change [136,175]. business strategy. In fossil-fuel-intensive industries, such as coal mining, the integration of ICT/digitization can include innovations for low-carbon utilization and conversion, carbon capture, utilization and storage and the development of green coal, among others . Industry 4.0 has managed to permeate all types of businesses, whether large or small, making it a prerequisite to becoming an environmentally sustainable . However, the way in which the processes of digitalization are initiated requires clear strategizing that goes beyond the walls of the organization to include the nation and its sustainability goals. 5.4. Easing bank lending conditions Several studies have recommended that policymakers should encourage banks to provide more flexible financing terms for green ICT projects that target problem areas in ecology and the environment [9,12,72,94,108,114,147,151]. For instance, Zhang et al. recommended that policymakers approach the financial sector to devise policies that allow for more affordable interest rates for funding ICT projects Similarly, Avom et al. recommended that policymakers should develop policies that facilitate access to finance for environmentally friendly technologies and projects. In the same vein, Anser et al. suggested that a broader money supply could help improving the quality of the environment through financing green ICT or sustainable projects. Chien et al. suggested a more comprehensive multi-phase approach, where, during the initial phase, policymakers are asked to develop policies that ease access to finance for small and medium enterprises to implement ICT/digitization based-solutions in their production. In the second phase, policymakers should link the financing conditions of new firms to their potential carbon footprint. 5. Policy implications and recommendations The aim of this section is to provide a summary of the most important policy implications and/or recommendations extracted from the selected articles. What follows is a discussion of policy recommendations found in the literature; where possible, we also provide a critical analysis of the feasibility/suitability of these recommendations, given the current appetite for carbon neutrality initiatives. 5.1. Promoting investments into ICT Throughout the array of articles reviewed in this study, the most commonly recommended policy was the immediate need to escalate investments in ICT-related sectors [33,66,75,76,105,108,156,206]. Gouvea et al. stressed the need for policymakers to direct investments towards ICT and other areas that can improve how energy and water is consumed. Greater investment in ICT also has the added benefit of solving the issues of the unavailability of ICT networks and/or issues with low connectivity, especially within developing nations, thereby bridging the digital divide . However, improving the infrastructure of ICT requires strategic planning and enough financial resources, which for some nations is neither monetarily feasible nor feasible in terms of capability. Such issues are resolved by asking for assistance from other more developed nations. It is important to note, however, that not all ICT investments are created equal. In some cases, investment in the wrong type of technology can be detrimental to environmental sustainability [66,75,156]. 5.5. Accelerate research into ICT/digitization Accelerating research into ICT/digitization has been advanced as a long-term strategic policy that can help significantly improve environmental sustainability [72,73,108,112,143,155,158,166,167,176,186]. What is clear from these articles is that further research is required to identify ways in which ICT, and the efficiency with which it operates, can be improved, and thus reduce the various aspects of environmental degradation. In Europe, for instance, Magazzino et al. suggested focus on green ICT projects and the way new technologies and their related infrastructures can be made more efficient. In the case of China, in an attempt to achieve its 2060 agenda, Ma et al. recommended the formulation of a global framework that integrates policies related to digitization, research development and technological innovations. 5.2. Regulation of the ICT trade Among the reviewed papers that dealt with the ICT trade, most agreed on the necessity for policymakers to design strategies that encourage environmental sustainability by regulating the import of ICT products [9,94]. Shehzad et al. recommended encouraging the use of advanced ICT by the general public, supporting local ICTbased companies and encouraging international companies to open production within a country. They argue that doing so would minimize imports of inferior ICT that would otherwise increase emissions through poor energy efficiency ratings and disposal issues at the end of their life cycles. 5.6. Smart homes, buildings, grids and cities According to several scholars, developing policies and designing strategies that encourage smart homes, smart buildings and smart cities should be among the top priorities of all the governments around the world in their battle against environmental degradation [9,77,147,158, 175,184]. Most of these studies have highlighted the importance of smart ICT devices in improving energy-efficiency in residential and public buildings, which would help reduce environmental degradation . For instance, Charfeddine and Kahia recommended the generalization of the use of several types of smart appliances, the IoT and blockchain technology, as well as encouraging investments in green technologies to improve environmental quality. Similar conclusions and recommendations, about the significant advantages of promoting and developing smart appliances and smart grid ideas have been highlighted by several authors, including Gao et al. , Awan et al. and Magazzino et al. among others. 5.3. Raising awareness of the harms and benefits of ICT An additional common policy that several of the selected articles have stressed is the necessity of raising awareness of ICT/digitization usage within countries. These include, for example, raising of public awareness about the benefits and harms of using ICT, and that it should be part of a comprehensive framework that considers the stage of economic development of a country . According to some academics, the educational system should include energy-saving techniques and environmental awareness in their syllabi to encourage the reduction of emissions reduction. When large higher education institutions transition from traditional classroom learning to more digitalized learning, this is critical . For instance, Zhang et al. recommended using internet technology in order to make a real transformation in the economic structure 5.7. Promoting the digital economy and e-commerce Some selected articles have highlighted the importance of promoting policies supporting the digital economy because of their 6. Future research avenues significant and positive, potential impact on the quality of the environment through the process of de-materialization, de-carbonization and demobilization [33,74,157]. In the same vein, have recommended that countries in the Latin and Central America region should promote investments into ICT to revolutionize online shopping, money transfers, online banking, traffic control, and education. Furthermore, Elheddad et al. suggested that governments should develop and implement effective support policies that promote internet usage and alleviate security concerns for online payments and thereby increase the prevalence of online shopping by customers. Oh and Park recommended the rapid adoption of trusted third-party digital repository services for the entire Korean economy to achieve reductions in CO2 emissions . The authors highlight the importance of setting up a global framework of new laws and regulations that will encourage energy efficiency. Zhang et al. recommend promoting the Internet Plus green low-carbon model rather than the Internet Plus background model as it will expand the existing industry to be less carbon-intensive. The aim of this section is to recommend avenues for future research concerning the effects of ICT/digitization on environmental Among the aspects the authors believe need more attention in this stream of research is in-depth analyses of the channels/pathways by which the environment is affected by this technology. In this regard, theoretical contributions from the literature are limited, leaving much room for extrapolation. First-, second-, and third-order effects are multifaceted and hard to analyze, since ICT products and services have impacts at each stage, some canceling each other out. Moreover, the review of selected literature revealed a heavy dependence on particular national-level or macro metrics (such as internet, mobile and telephone subscriptions, or a composite of them) that proxy ICT/digitization, and metrics related to the carbon footprint or emissions related metrics proxy for environmental sustainability. The authors attribute this to the ready availability of such data from sources such as the World Bank, among others. However, to provide a more comprehensive analysis, argue that studies should incorporate more holistic measures in the form of indices that consider several aspects of ICT/digitization or environmental sustainability. To this effect, Table 7 presents some proposed indicators of environmental Sustainability and ICT/ digitization. The synthesis of the associations among measures of ICT/digitization and environmental sustainability measures also revealed interesting peculiarities that can be further investigated in future research. Among these considerations is why a higher percentage of positive relationships has been found in group-based studies in comparison with those from single countries. Another potential avenue for researchers is whether the relationship between the dimensions of interest, namely ICT/digitization and environmental sustainability, is dependent on the level of economic development. Since most previous studies have investigated the topic at the country level, an interesting follow-up would be to include microlevel analyses to gauge the per capita effects of ICT/digitization on environmental sustainability (or the lack thereof). The extant literature in our sample also demonstrated an absence of the use of firm based data to analyze the research questions. Future studies could include CO2 emissions data at the firm level, for example, in concert with the level of ICT/digitization used by such firms. Studies should also consider the advent of newer technologies such as digital ledger technologies, given their disruptive nature and potential to drastically change the way in which industry and manufacturing operates, among other aspects. For that matter, future studies could investigate how the implementation of blockchain technology affects the carbon footprint and other measure of environmental sustainability. 5.8. Pushing for smart transportation To improve environmental sustainability, several studies have suggested that the application of ICT/digitization in the transportation sector has the potential to provide significant reductions in CO2 emissions [77,110,111,113,157,165,177,199]. For instance, Wang et al. showed that through a 6-month trial of a commercial telematics application, a 7.2% reduction in fuel consumption was witnessed, which has direct implications for reducing carbon emissions as well. Moreover, the application was used for only 25 tractors, which indicates the great potential for reducing CO2 emissions if such systems are applied to road freight distribution networks on a blanket basis, for thousands of trucks. According to Wang et al. , businesses can therefore leverage ICT to aid in the improvement of environmental quality and simultaneously generate economic benefits. Gao et al. recommended in the case of China that government policies should support the development of smart transportation to improve environmental quality. Similar recommendations have been highlighted by Chatti , who suggested that governments and transport companies should implement new ICT solutions for logistics and urban freight transport to maximize the benefits in terms of reducing pollution. These conclusions were also confirmed by Ndri et al. for the case of the least-developed countries. Ndri et al. recommended introducing ICT-based intelligent operations in the transportation sector to maximize the benefits of energy efficiency (conservation and reductions in fossil fuels) that ICT can offer to help accelerate the path towards sustainable development. 5.9. Other sustainable solutions to tackle current and future challenges of the ICT sector development 7. Conclusion Some of the sustainable solutions that can be proposed to tackle the current and future challenges of GHG emissions due to hardware, ICT infrastructure, and software products are as follows. First, one important sustainable solution to tackle the undesired effects of ICT is to improve the energy efficiency and optimizing the level of energy consumption of data centers. It is also important to develop and promote the implementation of power-saving measures in devices and networks. Second, it is also recommended to promote sustainable practices throughout the lifecycle of the different ICT components, from design to disposal [22,24]. For example, promoting the use of ecofriendly materials, recycling, proper disposal, and extending product lifecycles through repair and upgrades. Third, an additional possible sustainable solution is to promote virtualization and cloud computing to minimize energy consumption and improve energy conservation. Finally, it is also possible to encourage software developers to adopt environmentally friendly practices, such as optimizing code for energy efficiency, reducing data storage requirements, and minimizing network traffic. Research on how environmental sustainability can be promoted and lessen the contribution of emissions to global climate change has witnessed a drastic increase in urgency. To better understand how ICT/digitization has factored into environmental degradation, the authors conducted a systematic review of the related literature from Q1 2000 to Q1 2022. We carefully selected and reviewed 166 journal articles, and extracted and analyzed the bibliographic information pertaining to the topic. In doing so, our research questions addressed the consistency of the impacts of ICT/digitization over the last two decades as well as the ways in which governments and policymakers can alleviate the negative impacts of ICT and use the same technologies to promote The present review has highlighted noteworthy associations for the nexus between ICT/ digitization and environmental sustainability. The majority of such associations were negative and linear (i.e., they ICT/Digitization Environmental Sustainability Table 7 Proposed indicators for environmental sustainability and digitization research. Indicator Description Data availability/link Environmental Performance Index (EPI): The EPI ranks 180 countries (using 32 indicators across 11 categories) on environmental health and ecosystem vitality; gauging how close these countries are to established environmental policy targets. [19502020; open access, epi.yale.edu ] Index (ESI): The ESI score consists of five components (based on 21 indicators derived from 76 individual variables) and quantifies the likelihood/effectiveness of a country preserving their environmental resources. [19802000, open access, sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu ] Ecological Footprint (EF): The EF translates human resource consumption and waste generation in a country or any other entity into a measure of biological productive land and water and relates it to a measure of biological capacity. [19802018, open access data.footprintnetwork.org ] Environmental Vulnerability Index (EVI): The EVI characterizes the relative severity of various types of environmental issues suffered by 243 individual nations and geographies. [x, open access, vulnerabilityindex.net ] Network(ed) Readiness Index (NRI): The NRI measures the inclination for countries to make use of opportunities that ICT can offer via three components; (1) the political, market, regulatory and infrastructural environment offered by a given country/community for ICT; (2) the readiness of governments, businesses, and individuals/stakeholders in a country to utilize ICT; and (3) whether these stakeholders use ICT. [20122015; 2020, open access, networkreadinessindex.org ] Technology Achievement Index (TAI): The TAI captures how countries perform in the creation and diffusion of technologies as well as the development of related skilled labor. The index compiles data from eight indicators grouped across four dimensions. [20002018, open access, doi.org/10.1080/14649880120 105399 ] Digital Density Index (DDI): The DDI is a collection of digital technology indicators, from both private and public sources, across 33 major economies in the form of a report. [x, subscription-based, oxfordeconomics.com] Digital Adoption Index (DAI) The DAI is a worldwide index that measures countries digital adoption across three dimensions of the economy: people, government, and business. The index covers 180 countries on a 01 scale, and emphasizes the supply-side technologies necessary to promote development in the digital era. worldbank.org/en/publication/ wdr2016/Digital-AdoptionIndex] (International-)Digital Economy and Society Index ((I-)DESI): The DESI monitors Europes overall digital performance, tracking EU country progress in relation to digital competitiveness. To assess the state of digitalization of each member state as well as to identify areas requiring priority investment and action, performance of member states is monitored annually in the realms of (1) digital connectivity, (2) digital skills, (3) online activity and (4) digital public services. [20072020, open access, digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu ] Industry Digitalization Index (IDI): The IDI tracks the digitalization progress of businesses across various sectors, spanning four separate functions of digitalization in the processes of trade and general business activities. These functions are referred to as (1) upstream supply chain phase, (2) production phase, (3) downstream supply chain phase, and (4) digital infrastructure. [20002020, open access, futureoftrade.com ] The current review is not without its limitations. For instance, one limitation is that detailed solutions for sustainability were not provided because of the scope of the studies. Although the studies in the sample highlighted various issues of environmental degradation, some did not provide specific solutions or were not able to identify the source of the degradation in relation to specific ICT products or infrastructure. Additionally, the focus of the studies was primarily on macro-level or country-wide studies. Although these studies are important, they may not capture the nuances and complexities of sustainability at a more localized level. Future research should consider including more localized studies to provide a more comprehensive understanding of sustainability and its impacts at all levels. Overall, whereas the current review provides valuable insights into sustainability, further research is necessary to address these limitations and provide more robust findings. reduced degradation) with higher academic interest in examining such relationships across group-based studies. The review also identified and categorized the proxies of ICT/digitization and environmental sustainability used by the selected studies. A large majority of the selected studies relied on traditional measures such as internet, mobile and telephone subscriptions to proxy for ICT/digitization, whereas carbon footprints and air emission measures proxies for environmental sustainability (or degradation). In addition, the review found that GMM, ARDL and FE models were the most common econometric methods used for their associated data types used in conjunction with these proxies to investigate relationships between ICT/digitization and environmental sustainability relationships in the literature. The review also collated important recommendations for this research stream with regard to future studies, both in terms of theoretical pathways that can be developed further, as well as the categories of measures that can be expanded upon so as to improve the applicability of policy suggestions for decision makers. We also provide researchers with suggestions for more sophisticated measures that could be incorporated in future studies while identifying offshoots of the ICTsustainability literature. The topic is far from being saturated due to the rapid innovations in infrastructure, production and trade, banking and other sectors. Although it remains unclear how newer technologies, such as blockchain/digital ledgers or high-capacity batteries (in electric vehicles), for instance, will affect environmental sustainability, examples of the potential for ICT/digitization to abate emissions through improving the efficiency of services across several sectors are readily available, and have peaked the interest of in academics. CRediT authorship contribution statement Lanouar Charfeddine: Methodology, Writing original revised and final draft. Mohamed Umlai: Data curation, Writing original and revised draft. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.