Semiconductor Technology and the Energy Efficiency of ICT

CMOS circuits have been the workhorse of ICT for 40 years. Due to the unique scaling property of this technology, energy efficiency has enormously improved during that time, notably by lowering the supply voltage from the longtime standard of 5 to 1 V and less. As the era of happy scaling has come to an end, progress becomes increasingly difficult and techniques beyond 2D size reductions have come into play. A superior and viable alternative to CMOS has yet to be found.

Why Has CMOS Become the Sole Technology for Information Processing? CMOS (complementary metal oxide semiconductor) circuits totally dominate information processing and memory devices (RAM) today, both for professional ICT and consumer products. Also, solid-state disks assembled from flash-type memory chips are currently making ever deeper inroads into permanent mass storage, the traditional realm of magnetic disks. To fully understand that situation, we begin this review with a brief account of why CMOS technology displaced all contenders. Initially a slow alternative to TTL, ECL, GaAs and other circuit technologies, CMOS had two unique and highly valuable traits: 1. n- and p-channel MOSFETs (metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors) are manufactured side-by-side on the same silicon chip and work together as pairs in each logic gate. As these complementary switches turn on and off in an alternating fashion, supply current dropped to zero once a circuit had settled to a steady state. As a consequence, power dissipation was directly H. Kaeslin (&) Microelectronics Design Center, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland e-mail: kaeslin@ee.ethz.ch  International Publishing Switzerland 2015 L.M. Hilty and B. Aebischer (eds.), ICT Innovations for Sustainability, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 310, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09228-7_5 105 106 H. Kaeslin proportional to the switching activities in a circuit or, in other words, to the overall computational burden. This was in stark contrast to competing circuit technologies that draw significant amounts of DC current even when idle. 2. Almost all figures of merit of a circuit benefited from smaller layout geometries. Over the past 40 years, transistors, interconnect lines, and the separations between them have been downsized by a factor of approximately 1.4 with each new process generation. Each such shrink improved the number of transistors per area, the switching speed and, hence, the attainable clock frequency, the computational performance and the storage capacity, the energy dissipated per switching event, and the unit costs per function (transistor, logic gate, computing operation, memory bit, etc.). The first person to recognize the tremendous potential of CMOS scaling was Robert Dennard, who in 1974 formulated a set of rules that involved both geometrical and electrical quantities. Scaling is what has made it possible to serve ever higher computational and storage needs over several decades. Dennard scaling can indeed be understood as the explanation behind Moores law. To this day, the ability to offer better performance at lower unit costs constitutes the competitive advantage that drives the semiconductor industry and that justifies ever larger investments. Established companies and start-ups eagerly picked up on the new possibilities, offering ever more sophisticated products, software applications, and services to the public. Watch circuits, in which speed is immaterial and zero standby power crucial, were in fact among the earliest CMOS applications before the technology entered embedded computing in the form of microprocessors for its robustness, low power, andat the timerelative simplicity. Affordable CMOS microprocessors later helped create the home computer, a product and a market that had not existed before and that paved the way to personal computing. Gaining in density and performance with each new process generation, CMOS Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) circuits gradually moved up the ladder and eventually made their way into supercomputers. Integrating many millions of logic gates on a single silicon microchip ultimately proved more useful than squeezing the maximum operating frequency out of a handful of gates manufactured using a fancy technology. Over the same time frame, VLSI chips also enabled mobile computing, broadband and digital wireless telecommunication, handheld music players and GPS devices, smartphones, download services, video streaming, Internet shopping, social networks, and all those applications that we see today. As long as a typical processor dissipated only a few watts due to its relatively modest transistor count and operating frequency, VLSI designers had no reason to pay much attention to energy efficiency. Cost and performance invariably came first, and much the same applied to memory chips. This attitude radically changed in the 1990s with the advent of mobile computing which turned battery run time Semiconductor Technology and the Energy Efficiency of ICT 107 voltage constant-field scaling constant-voltage scaling [V] 5 DVFS & adaptive threshold control 3.0m 2.0m 1.5m 1.0m 0.6m 0.5m nominal supply voltage 4 Udd Uth above-threshold gate drive voltage 3 2 high-speed operation 0.35m typical threshold voltage 0.25m low-voltage low-leakage ? 180nm 130nm 90nm 1 65nm 45nm 32nm 22nm 16nm 11nm time 0 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 [A.D.] Fig. 1 Evolution of CMOS supply and threshold voltages. Source into a key issue. Mains-operated computers also ran into power limitations due to the problems associated with carrying away the heat produced by high-performance CPUs and graphic processors. This is because thermal flows in excess of 100120 W drive up the costs for heat sinks, cooling fans, heat pipes, and related equipment to uneconomical heights. As the energy dissipated by a CMOS circuit for a given computation grows with the supply voltage squared, devising circuits and architectures that could provide the same level of performance from a lower voltage was a natural choice; see Fig. 1. Suspending the clock to inactive circuit blocks, known as clock gating, was an important innovation, but there were many others such as input silencing, delay balancing, and dynamic back biasing. Over many product generations, the combined efforts of scaling and improved engineering led to a reduction in the amount of energy spent on a given computing or storage operation by several orders of magnitude. Yet, the explosion of new ICT products and services and their general adoption simply outpaced those efficiency gains. Today, the primary goal of VLSI design is to provide more computing performance and more storage capacity within the current power and energy budgets.

Where Does CMOS Technology Stand Today? Dennard scaling, where geometric shrinking is accompanied by a proportional reduction of the supply voltage to maintain a constant electric field, came to an end around 2004, at the same time as the Gigahertz race; see Figs. 1 and 2. This is because to maintain the operating speed, MOSFET threshold voltages must be scaled down along with the supply voltage. Unfortunately, the lower its threshold voltage, the more a MOSFET tends to leak when turned off. To make things worse, the dependency is inherently exponential as any further reduction of a mere 70100 mV inflates the sub-threshold current by a factor of 10. And to complicate 108 10,000,000 1,000,000 Transistors per chip 100,000 Number of transistors (thousands) Relative performance Clock speed (MHz) Power type (W) Number of cores/chip 10,000 1,000 100 10 Year of introduction Fig. 2 Transistors, frequency, power, performance, and processor cores over time. The original Moores law projection of increasing transistors per chip remains unabated even as performance has stalled. Source matters further, leakage is highly dependent on temperature and subject to important variations from the fabrication process. All this, in conjunction with the billions of potential leakage paths present in any complex VLSI chip, currently prevents industry from generally adopting core supply voltages much below 0.8 V. Instead, supply and threshold voltages are chosen so as to balance dynamic and static power in search of the maximum overall energy efficiency. As a collateral damage, advanced high-performance VLSI technologies have lost the original CMOS virtue of zero or close-to-zero quiescent current. A circuit technique known as power gating had to be introduced to electrically disconnect temporarily inactive circuit blocks from the supply voltage. Dark silicon is a buzzword coined to describe the growing gap between the number of logic gates that can be manufactured on a chip with each process generation and the number one can actually afford to operate simultaneously without exceeding the thermal envelope. As Dennard scaling ran out of steam, semiconductor technologists began to resort to low-[r inter-level dielectrics, copper interconnect (instead of aluminum), crystal straining, high-[r metal gate (HKMG) stacks, silicon on insulator (SOI) fabrication, and other alternative approaches. The finFETannounced in 2011 and referred to as tri-gate transistor by Intelsignificantly improved current control by allowing the gate field to impinge on the conducting channel from two or even three sides (instead of just one as in planar devices; compare Fig. 3a, c). This has made it possible to reduce voltage levels from 1.0 to 0.8 V, but necessitated a total redesign of the MOSFETs spatial arrangement and manufacturing steps . The ultimate stage of development in this direction would be the gate-all-around FET where an annular gate completely surrounds a silicon nanowire; see Fig. 3d. (a) field acts on channel from 1 side 109 G S D n+ p gate dielectric current flow technological evolution (b) from 3 sides (c) from 2 sides gate yoke fin, p-doped under yoke (d) from 4 sides nanowire, in passage pgate dielectric Fig. 3 Topological options for field-effect devices. Fully depleted n-channel MOSFET (a), planar double-gate MOSFET (b), fin-FET (c), and nanowire gate-all-around transistor (d) (simplified). Source Samples have been demonstrated in the laboratory, but the industrial viability is yet to be proven. Circuit and architecture designers also continue to develop innovative ideas including multiple sleep and power saving modes, dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS), heterogeneous multicore architectures, and approximate/inexact/ probabilistic computing. However, as the low hanging fruits have been harvested, alternative techniques tend to suffer from diminishing returns.

What Are the Perspectives? Now at the 22 nm generation, CMOS technology is approaching atomistic dimensions. As size reductions cannot go on indefinitely,1 important decisions lie ahead after 40 extremely successful years of geometric scaling. Compared to the tried and tested MOSFET, a superior switching device ought to Current expectations are that MOSFETs should continue to behave as such down to a channel length in the order of 7 nm before source-to-drain tunneling will likely render further shrinks pointless. Whether the electrical properties and unit costs of such devices will justify the tremendous capital expenditures required to develop and produce them remains an open question, though. 110 impact ionijunction- zation FET; less FET; CMOS tunnel FET; CMOS GNR tunnel FET; carbon nanotubes CMOG switching device; logic family key virtue 1960 1945 relay vacuum tube BJT; TTL / ECL high speed 1985 MOSFET; 1965 NMOS / PMOS 1975 high density @ low cost or low power high perf. 1995 BJT & MOSFET; BiCMOS 2015 III-V & Ge FETs; FPNI-CMOS ??-FET; finFET; memristor; crossbar logic quantum devices refractive gate; mux-based logic RSFQ/ spintronics Josephson molecular junction must operate at cryogenic temperatures Fig. 4 Predominant computing technology, past, present, and future (note: years indicate massive shifts, not date of announcement). Source operate with a lower voltage swing, exhibit a more abrupt on-off transition, manage with smaller electrical charges, and be insensitive to or take advantage of atomistic effects. Fabricating isolated devices does not suffice to supersede CMOS, however. Any realistic alternative must combine billions of switches in a tiny volume, offer comparable levels of performance, be produceable in large quantities at comparable cost, and operate at room temperatures. Research into a new switch has been underway for quite some time. Many ideas have been published, many prospective devices have been studied and simulated, some have even been manufactured in the lab. However, no truly superior and industrially viable replacement for the MOSFET has been demonstrated yet, and research continues in multiple directions as summarized in Fig. 4. In a joint effort by industry and academia, the semiconductor community regularly publishes their assessments in the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors . In the meantime, industry is experimenting with ultra compact 3D assemblies of processor and memory chips that reduce parasitic capacitances and so afford further energy efficiency gains. This requires vertical interconnects between stacked semiconductor chips, called through-silicon vias, and poses heat evacuation problems. Another active research avenue aims at locally replacing the silicon in the transistors by high mobility semiconductors such as indium gallium arsenide (for the n-channel MOSFETs) and germanium (for the p-channel devices). Current plans are to deposit thin films of those materials on silicon wafers to avoid the costs of exotic substrates. What justifies the extra process complexity is the 111 promise of energy efficiency gains on the order of 60 % that should result from bringing the supply voltage down to a mere 0.5 V with no loss in performance . A major challenge on the architecture side is to reconcile flexibility and a simple programming model with energy efficiency. Agreeing on stable standards for all those data and signal processing algorithms that involve frequent and stereotypical calculations would allow the ICT industry to develop fixed function blocks for them and to incorporate those into future processors as a kind of hardware subroutines. This would help because instruction set architectures waste orders of magnitude more energy for certain highly repetitive calculations than hardwired logic does.

Conclusions While it is utterly clear that there can be no further progress without corresponding improvements in energy efficiency, the thirst for ever higher data bandwidths, the quest for better video resolutions, the current move towards storing everything in the cloud rather than locally,2 the desire to communicate even with humble objects over the Internet, and similar trends will in all likelihood continue to drive up the energy demand of ICT as a whole. Unfortunately, CMOS scaling alone can no longer be counted upon to yield the same gains in terms of performance, efficiency, and cost reduction as in the past. And unless a radical breakthrough occurs, growing capital needs will further restrict the number of manufacturers in the semiconductor industry.
